===== PDF PAGE 001 =====



===== PDF PAGE 002 =====

         Digitized by the Internet Archive
            in 2018 with funding from
             Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.0rg/details/robotintelligencOOOOheis


===== PDF PAGE 003 =====

   ROBOT
INTELLIGENCE
... with experiments


===== PDF PAGE 004 =====

Other TAB Books by the author:

No. 714 Radio Astronomy for the Amateur
No. 841 Build Your Own Working Robot
No. 971 Miniprocessors: From Calculators to Computers
No. 1101 How to Design & Build Your Own Custom TV Games
No. 1205 PASCAL
No. 1241 How to Build Your Own Self-Programming Robot




Dedication:
This book is dedicated to experimenters who lack the appro¬
priate academic credentials, but qualify as true scientists by
virtue of their imagination, talent, dedication to hard work, and
proven performance.


===== PDF PAGE 005 =====

     ROBOT
INTELLIGENCE
... with experiments
      BY DAVID L HEISERMAN




YhHITAB books Inc.
.EJSilSU BLUE RIDGE SUMMIT, PA. 17214


===== PDF PAGE 006 =====

FIRST EDITION

SECOND PRINTING

Copyright © 1981 by TAB BOOKS Inc.

Printed in the United States of America

Reproduction or publication of the content in any manner, without
express permission of the publisher, is prohibited. No liability is
assumed with respect to the use of the information herein.

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Heiserman, David L. 1940-
    Robot intelligence ... with experiments.

     Includes index.
     1. Artificial intelligence—Problems, exercises,
etc. I. Title
Q335.H44          001.53'5     80-21440
ISBN 0-8306-9685-7
ISBN 0-8306-1191-6 (pbk.)

Cover art courtesy of Computer Graphics, Melvin L. Prueitt, Dover Publica¬
tions Inc.


===== PDF PAGE 007 =====

                                                          J\
                                      Contents




1 A Fresh Look at Robotics                                         g
  A Brief and Persona! History of EAMI—The Theory of Evolution¬
  ary Machine Intelligence—EAMI and Animal Behavior—A
  Word about Demonstrating EAMI Systems
2 Getting the Most from This Book and Your Work                   25
  Layout of the Projects and Programs—An Invitation to Experi¬
  ment and Play—The Need To Conserve Memory Space—A
  Word to Readers Who Do Not Have a TRS-80
3 ALPHA-1 BASIC-The Starting Point                                31
  The Nature of ALPHA-1 BASIC—The ALPHA-1 BASIC Screen
  Format—The ALPHA-1 BASIC Flowchart—Subroutines for
  ALPHA-1 BASIC—The Main Program—Loading and Testing the
  Program—Composite ALPHA-1 BASIC Program
4 ALPHA-1 with Scoring                                            51
  Some Thoughts about ALPHA-1 Scoring—ALPHA-1 Scoring
  Flowchart—ALPHA-1 Scoring Subroutines—The Master Pro¬
  gram for ALPHA-1 Scoring—Loading The ALPHA-1 Scoring
  Program—Suggested Experiments for ALPHA-1 Scoring-
  Composite Program for ALPHA-1 with Scoring
5 Fun and Games with ALPHA-1                                      61
  ALPHA-I Maze Game—ALPHA-1 Paint into a Corner Game—
  The Robot Lawnmower—Composite Programs

6 CompilingDatafor ALPHA-1 Behavior                               76
  The Learning Curve for Adaptive Machine Intelligence—
  ALPHA-1 Compile Screen Formats—Flowchart for ALPHA-1
  Compile—Subroutines for ALPHA-1 Compile—The Master
  Program for ALPHA-1 Compile—Loading ALPHA-1 With
  Compile—Some Notes on Running ALPHA-1 Compile—
  Composite Program for ALPHA-1 Compile


===== PDF PAGE 008 =====

 7 A New Sensation and ALPHA-II
   BASIC ALPHA-11 Project—Flowchart for BASIC ALPHA-11—
   Subroutines for BASIC ALPHA-II—BASIC ALPHA-II Master
   Program—Loading BASIC ALPHA-II—What You Should Expect
   for the Program—ALPHA-II Nest with Compile—Loading
   ALPHA-II Nest Compile—Flowchart for ALPHA-II Nest
   Compile—Comments on Running ALPHA-II Nest Compile—
   Composite Program Listings

 8 Gearing Up For More ALPHA-II Activity
   An ALPHA-II Conversion Demo Program—ALPHA-II with Track
   Sense Option—ALPHA-II with Multiple-Sense Printing—
   ALPHA-II with Sense Responses—Getting Two Critters onto the
   Screen at One Time—Composite Program Listings


 9 BETA-1 BASIC-The Next Big Step
   The BASIC BETA-1 Flowchart—What to Expect from Running
   BETA-1 BASIC—Loading BASIC BETA-1—BETA-1 BASIC with
   Scoring—BETA-1 BASIC with Scoring and Showing Memory—
   Composite Program Listings


10 Gathering Experimental Data for BETA-1
   Simple Trail-Drawing Feature for BETA-1—Improved Trail-
   Drawing Program for BETA-1—BETA-1 with Score Compile and
   Show Memory—For the Purists: An ALPHA/BETA Compile
   Program—Suggested Project for Ambitious Experimenters—
   Composite Listings


11 Disturbing the BETA-1 Environment
   Preview of BETA-Class Adaptive Behavior—BETA-1 Adaptive
   Program with Manual Disturb—Adaptive BETA-1 with Semi-
   Automatic Disturb—Compiling BETA-Class Adaptation
   Curves—Composite Listings


12 BETA-II and An Unexpected Discovery
   BETA-II Conversion Demo—BETA-II with Trail Drawing—
   BETA-II with Obstacles and Manual Disturb—BETA-II with In¬
   dependent Responses and Disturb—Composite Program List¬
   ings


13 A Return to BETA-1: With Confidence This Time
   BETA with Confidence—A Simple BETA-1 with Confidence—
   BETA-1 Confidence with Manual Disturb—Compiling Adaptation
   Curves for BETA with Confidence—Composite Program Listings


14 Introducing the GAMMA-Class Creature
   Generalization is the Key to GAMMA Behavior—Flowcharts for
   GAMMA-1 BASIC—Loading GAMMA-1 BASIC—What to Expect
   from GAMMA-1 BASIC—Some Further Notes about the GAMMA
   Function Subroutine—Composite Program Listing


===== PDF PAGE 009 =====

15   Testing GAMMA-rs Adaptability                           291
     GAMMA-I with Manual Disturb—Training a GAMMA-1—
     GAMMA-1 with Semi-Automatic Compile—Composite Program
     Listings

16   A Crash Course in EAMI Programming                      303
     ALPHA-IG—ALPHA-IIG—BETA-IG—BETA-IIG—GAMMA-IG—A
     word about GAMMA-IIG—Composite Program Listings

     Appendix A—Standard ASCII Codes and Characters          320

     Appendix B—TRS-80 Graphics Codes and Figures            321

     Index                                                   322


===== PDF PAGE 010 =====

              Preface


The robots are coming. There can be no doubt about that. The
only questions are: How? When? and Who?
     I am convinced that this book represents a step in the right
direction for answering all three questions. It shows how the job
can be done, it suggests how long it will take, and it invites you
to participate in a meaningful way.
     Above all, this is a book for people who want to work with
machine intelligence and the germ of real robots on a first-hand
basis. It’s one thing to read a book outlining the history of
robotics, summarizing a lot of on-going activity in the field and
suggesting some exciting prospects for the future. It is quite
another thing, however, to reach out and grasp the whole matter
with your own talent and imagination.
     This is a book that presents a particularly vigorous and rich
form of machine intelligence in the framework of computer
simulations. That isn’t to say that the intelligence, itself, is
simulated. Quite the contrary. The only thing that is simulated
is the mechanical action of the robot machine which employs the
intelligence.
     While there are indeed some distinct advantages to fitting
machine intelligence into an actual working model of a robot (see
How To Build Your Own Self-Programming Robt^ TAB book No.
1241) there are also some advantages to simulating the behavior
on the screen of a home computer system. In fact, the two
approaches complement one another quite nicely.
     Are you ready to go to work? Good. I’m looking forward to
reading about your results in some technical magazines. Who
knows? Maybe I’ll even be seeing you on TV!

                                              David L.Heiserman


===== PDF PAGE 011 =====

        A Fresh Look at Robotics                              1


On the evening of January 25, 1921, Karel Capek’s play, R. U,R.
(Rossum’s Universal Robots), gave birth to the 20th Century
notion of artificial men and introduced the word robot. The birth¬
place was Prague, Czechoslovakia, but in less than two years,
audiences in Germany, England, and the United States were
applauding German and English versions.
      The times were right for such a play, and its influence remains
with us today. Unfortunately, the influence oiR.U.R. is not an
entirely positive one.
     R. U.R. is responsible for some serious misconceptions about
robotics that have yet to be ironed out. The central theme of the
play is that technology can lead humanity along a road to total
destruction. What begins as an exciting and beneficial technologi¬
cal enterprise can, if left unchecked, get out of hand very suddenly.
      And indeed, there are many unenlightened people today who
truly fear the coming of real robots and have every serious hope
that robots will remain forever only on the pages of science fiction
books and in the imaginations of film and TV producers. These
people aren’t “fooled” by the positive “robot propaganda” of the
film. Star Wars, nor are they comforted in the least by Isaac
Asimov’s Laws of Robotics.
      If you ever become involved in modem robot work, even as an
amateur experimenter, you will eventually feel some pressure
from people who do not agree you are doing anything positive for
the welfare of humanity.
      Serious social resistance to the development of robots will not
become a big problem for some time, however. It is a problem we
will have to reckon with one of these days, but it isn’t an immediate
concern.

                                                                   9


===== PDF PAGE 012 =====

      There is a second feature ofR. U.R. that does pose a problem
of immediate concern. The word robot is derived from a Czech
expression          which implies a quality of slavery or servitude.
      Nowadays human slavery is regarded as a very nasty thing in
most of the world. On the other hand, most people agree it would
be quite nice to have a slave or two to take care of our more
mundane and difficult chores. Since human slavery is out of vogue,
the convenient alternative is a mechanical man that is capable of
doing the same work as a human slave, but without bringing us face
to face with any serious moral issues.
      We thus face a rather arbitrary, but firmly established
doctrine—The whole purpose of robotics is to sidestep the moral
issue of human slavery and come up with a machine that does our
bidding with great energy, competence, and unquestionable loy¬
alty.
      “Ah, how nice it is that you are building a robot. What does it
 do for you?” Does it answer the door and telephone for you?Does it
sweep the floor or carry out the garbage? Does it mix drinks and
fetch the evening paper?” In other words, “How good is yoursto^
machine?”
      Such a banal attitude toward the purpose of robotics was
engendered, at least in our historical era, by R. U.R., and it has
been perpetuated by most robot fiction as well as more serious
robot research.
      The notion that a robot ought to do something in response to its
human master’s commands is threaded through virtually all think¬
ing about robots. To see how well the notion has served the cause
of robotics, just look around at all the nifty robots serving us
today—there aren’t any, are there?
     So R.U.R. 'is really the foundation for most robot thinking
today. Take from that play its social commentary and the servile
implications of the word robota, and you have a positive vision of
what robots ought to be. But, look only at the social commentary
and the implications ofrobota—as most people do— and you have a
couple of serious problems to contend with. R.U.R. thus sparks
the vision of robotics, but at the same time, draws some lines that
few researchers have dared to cross or, indeed, realize can be
crossed.
     Of course, R. U.R. doesn’t epitomize a:// the problems of mod¬
em robot research. WWII provided the motivation for doing a lot of
 research in electronics and machine control, and post-war re-

10


===== PDF PAGE 013 =====

 searchers found they had a whole inventory of new devices and
 theories to make their work more exciting and meaningful.
      Physiologists jumped onto the electronics bandwagon quite
 early in the game, first using new and sensitive electronic equip¬
 ment to measure physiological activity of an electrical nature (in
nerve, muscle and cardiac tissues) and then to build electronic
analogues of biological systems.
      Medical journals suddenly began looking something \\kePopu-
lar Electronics. To the untrained eye, it was difficult to tell the
difference between a circuit for a one-tube radio receiver (usually
built into a piepan or a wooden cheese box) and an electronic model
of a brain cell.
      The unfortunate side of the matter, as far as robotics is
concerned, is that researchers seemed to lose sight of the fact that
the electronic models of physiological systems were based on
biological theories. Most of those theories have undergone a
number of revisions through the past 25 years, and the most
successful medical researchers rarely resort to electronic model¬
ling. Biochemistry is the thing these days, but a lot of robot
researchers don’t seem to recognize that fact.
      The nifty electronic analogues of biological systems de¬
veloped some 25 years ago, and since chucked as useless novelties
by the physiologists, remain as the basis of far too much robot work
today. To be sure, the circuitry has been updated to include
computers and microprocessors, the roboticists aren’t altogether
ignorant of the most recent views of physiology. The problem is an
insistence upon employing an outmoded procedure of robotics by
analogy.
     The thinking goes something like this—if we want to build a
machine that mimicks the behavior of a man (i.e. a robot), we
must begin by building electronic systems that mimick the
activity of human/animal parts.
     It is a case of analogy piled upon analogy. Given the time and
funding, one can construct some highly elaborate analogies of
animal organisms. Given the proper training in physiology and
electronics, an ingenious (and well funded) researcher can come up
with a pretty nifty “eye” that can recognize certain elementary
patterns and distinguish one kind of motion from another.
     It’s possible to build a “finger,” too. It can sense pressure and
temperature, and respond by moving around on the workbench.
Such electromechanical analogues have been around for quite some
time now, and most work along this line concerns applying modem

                                                                   11


===== PDF PAGE 014 =====

microelectronics to get the physical size down to reasonable
proportions or extend the range of possible activity.
      This is not to say that researchers are wholly ignorant of the
limitations of building analogies of biological systems. On the
contrary. We all realize that a working analogue of a simple animal
brain would require vast compute facilities now beyond the reach of
economic reason.
      Analogue builders are left in the position of treading water
until further developments reduce the size, increase the sophisti¬
cation, and lower the costs of the parts. The general attitude is
 this— we will do the best we can with what we have right now. And
 when the time is right (that is to say, when some sort of great
breakthrough occurs), we will be ready for it.
      Analogue builders, nor the most part, adhere to an admirable
faith in technology. It is a sort of messianic faith that someone,
somewhere, sometime will come up with a discovery that will let
us put together all the bits and pieces of physiological analogues
 into a working unit of manageable physical proportions.
      The possibility that there is an alternative to building
 analogues is practically unthinkable. At best, such as notion is
 something like contemplating the sound of one hand clapping—it
 makes sense only in the most obtuse philosophical framework. At
 worst, it smacks of heresy.
      Nevertheless, this book suggests an alternative approach to
developing real robots. It suggests that the notion of building
analogies of physiological systems ought to be abandoned in favor
of an alternative that promises to do away with the need for
counting on some great gift of future technology.
      The subject of this book, evolutionary adaptive machine intel¬
ligence, brings those ‘'future developments” right up to our
doorstep. That is not to say you will be able to realize the robot of
your dreams overnight, or even within the next five years or so. A
new idea of this sort requires a lot of sound and responsible
research before it is ready for full-scale implementation. The
experiments outlined in this book represent the very beginning of
the job, there is much more work to be done. But, the tone of the
research is entirely different from that of traditional analogue
builders. In our case here, the main hurdle is the sheer bulk of the
work that had to be done. The nature of the work is quite well
defined and well within the grasp of current technology, however.
The idea is a workable one, and all this work concerns refining the
idea and proving that it is a viable one.

12


===== PDF PAGE 015 =====

      Besides marking a departure from conventional analogue
thinking, the ideas about robotics presented in this book call for
doing away with the R. U.R. notion that a robot must be a servile
creature. Viewing a robot as a mechanical creature with some aura
of independence is not wholly necessary to the work that must be
done at the present time, but it sets the stage for an attitude that
narrows the work into more productive channels.
      What does this new approach offer in terms of allaying fears
about robotics? Nothing that I can see right now. In fact, some of
the programs listed in this book create mere spots of light on a
TV-like screen that behave in a fashion sometimes bordering on
 being awesome. That spot of light cannot hurt anyone, of course;
 but, if you understand exactly what that spot of light is doing and
 the mechanisms behind its behavior, I can promise there will be
 moments when you wonder whether or not you are playing with
 something that might get out of hand when its transformed into a
 real creature.
      Does the prospect of building an intelligence without human
control bother you? Does it excite you? Does it both bother and
excite you? Fear comes from ignorance and excitement comes
from engaging in activities that feed excitement. In any event then,
you ought to do the work suggested here.
A BRIEF AND PERSONAL HISTORY OF EAMI
     Take a moment, if you will, to consider a brief and somewhat
personal history of evolutionary adaptive machine intelligence.
The purpose of this little dissertation is twofold—first, to show
that the idea did not come about overnight, and second, to set the
stage for the more technical and theoretical discussions of the
matter.
     I began thinking about robots seriously in 1974. At that time, I
followed the sort of thinking that typifies that of many amateur
roboticists today. My immediate goal was to build a machine that
would obey my commands and yet include some automatic features
that would allow the machine to operate somewhat independent of
direct, literal commands.
     The result was a charming little machine I called Buster.
Complete plans for a working model of Buster can be found in my
book. Build Your Own Working Robot, TAB book No. 841.
      While Buster eventually satisfied my original goals and, in¬
deed, exceeded them in some respects, I felt a certain kind of
dissatisfaction. Buster was OK, but there seemed to be a neces¬
sary next step to be taken.

                                                                  13


===== PDF PAGE 016 =====

      Building Buster was an exciting job, and the more I worked on
the manuscript for the book, the more excited I became. I think that
element of excitement is reflected in that work. But, the excite¬
ment was not well defined.
      Setting Buster aside, I began searching for some definition of
the strange combination of dissatisfaction and excitement. Looking
around at what others were doing with robots—both on the
amateur and professional levels—I began seeing the people run¬
ning headlong into the same barrier. That barrier was the exceed¬
ing complexity of the systems they envisioned. It is one thing to
build a little machine that creeps around a room, avoids obstacles
and understands a small vocabulary of spoken words. That’s all
nice, fun and a necessary part of robot work. However, to extrapo¬
late the ideas and mechanisms to the kinds of machines people want
robots to be posed some serious problems.
      There is a rather practical principle of science that says
something like this—if a theory leads to greater complication than
simplicity, its probably wrong. Oh sure, I know about the idea that
every new theory poses more questions than it answers, but that
isn’t the point here. Any theory that is worth anything tends to
simplify the matters it deals with. Einstein’s Theories of Relativity
certainly pose more challenges, but at the same time they tidy up
our view of the universe as compared to the older notions of
Newton.
      In 1976, it wasn’t difficult to see that robotics was getting
itself into a mess. Using the general approaches of that time, things
were getting far too complicated. It was time to come up with a new
theory that would pull everything back together again.
      Two magazine articles written during that formative period
reflect my attempts to devise a new and more general theory of
robotics. “What Is a Robot?” (Personal Computing, July/August,
1977) defines what a robot should be and what it should not be. The
second article, “Good Grief! Now there’s Rodney and Buster”
(Modern Electronics, March, 1978), suggests a four-step evolu¬
tionary approach to the development of intelligent robots.
      While writing that second magazine article, I was in the
middle of a new robot project. The new machine, Rodney, was
something entirely different from Buster. Rodney reflects the first
three stages of evolutionary robotics, and one of the more obvious
results is a mechanical creature that tends to exhibit personality
traits.
      Rodney supports the workability of the evolutionary ap¬
proach to robotics. The project clearly demonstrates that it is

14


===== PDF PAGE 017 =====

possible to build a self-programming, self-directed, and indepen¬
dent creature, using relatively simple and commonly available
parts.
      The Rodney project is completely summarized in my book.
How To Build Your Own Self-Programming Robot, TAB book
 No. 1241. Rodney represents a new generation of robots, using
 a microprocessor technology in place of the purely TTL technol¬
 ogy of the Buster machine. TTiat technological improvement,
 however, is incidental compared to the conceptual differences.
      The evolutionary approach to robotics, as exemplified by
 Rodney, allows a machine to evolve in the context of machines,
 as opposed to force-fitting a machine into a biological context. A
 machine allowed to evolve within its own context eventually
 begins exhibiting forms of overt behavior that are markedly
 similar to living creatures. And it is at that point— at the level
 of overt behavior— that we can begin drawing legitimate paral¬
 lels between animal and robot activity.
      The Rodney machine is a successful project. While watching
the machine roam around the room and program itself to respond
to events that upset its view of the environment, I began
realizing that yet another key element was missing from the
theory. It wasn’t until I simulated the intelligence on the screen
of a home computer that I found that missing element.
      Rodney does something that is difficult to notice whenever
you don’t know exactly what to look for. Rodney exhibits a form
of adaptive intelligence that is more clearly observable by means
of a faster-than-life simulation. The creatures have the ability to
adapt their behavior patterns to meet changing needs. It was
there all along, but I missed it.
      So the Rodney machine was still new and the manuscript for
How To Build Your Own Self-Programming Robot was still in the
editorial stages of publication when I began work on this book.
Now the perspective is clear, and I do not have the feeling that
anything is missing.
      This book on computer simulation of robot intelligence does
not make the Rodney project obsolete, however. As mentioned
earlier, Rodney exhibits the qualities of adaptive machine intel¬
 ligence. The advantage of using the computer simulations is that
 it is far easier to study the mechanisms, gather data, and
compile graphs that show the inherent nature of evolutionary
adaptive machine intelligence.
      A secondary advantage of this simulation project is that one
can begin doing useful research work without having to spend a

                                                                15


===== PDF PAGE 018 =====

number of months building the hardware from scratch. Of
course, a little spot of light blinking around on ±e monitor of a
home computer lacks the flavor of a mechanical gadget whizzing
around the room. However, robot experiment who have no taste
for building hardware can participate in the work that has to be
done, putting their home computers to work.
     The past six years have amounted to a search for meaning¬
ful generalities. The objective has been to come up with a set of
theories and perspectives on robotics that transcend the current
state of electronics technology and thus promise to be useful for
a good many years to come. For the first time, I have the
distinct impression that we have arrived.
     Future developments in electronics and computer technol¬
ogy will certainly make the methods for demonstrating and
implementing the theories different from what they are now.
The work is not contingent upon future developments; every¬
thing is here now.
     This is not to say that the bulk of the work is already done.
Far from it. Every detail must be checked, doublechecked, and
backed up with endless hours of careful thought and hard work.
While there might appear to be few, if any, serious loose ends
on the basic theory, a lot of questions remain to be answered,
and the means for answering those questions (or indeed many of
the questions, themselves) cannot be framed until some of the
preliminary work is done.

THE THEORY OF EVOLUTIONARY MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
     In a nutshell, the whole idea of evolutionary machine intel¬
ligence is to develop machines in the context of machines and
leave the theories of electrical activity in biological tissues to
the physiologists. Without a doubt, computer technology is
enjoying a level of power and sophistication beyond that
achieved by any other manmade device. It is instructive to
imagine what the state of computer technology would be today if
everyone had insisted upon developing computers along the
theories of the human brain. We would probably still be trying to
culture an AND gate in a test tube. So the notion of letting
machines develop in their most natural context is not a new one
at all. For reasons that seem to surpass any rational human
understanding, however, roboticists have traditionally failed to
view things that way.
     Looking at electronic circuits in their most elementary
forms, you will find that many of them respond to relevant

16


===== PDF PAGE 019 =====

influences in a reflexive fashion. A loudspeaker, for instance,
responds to signals from a microphone, a light responds to the
action of a switch. The scheme has an input and an output. Do
something at the input that is relevant to the mechanism and
something happens at the output.
     Fitting the idea into the framework of very simple robot
machines doesn’t create any technical or philosophical problems.
Quite often it is a simple matter of changing the wording. A
robot can sense contact with an obstacle and respond by moving
away from it. In a very real sense, this is an example of machine
reflex activity. Why get all tangled up with the theories of nerve
conduction and muscle activity when a 50-cent switch, a couple
of digital ICs, and a motor can do the same job?
     Reflex activity, in a purely electronic context, can be
carried to some very elaborate extremes. A great number of
simple sensing devices, coupled through a logic control scheme,
can feed vast amounts of relevant information to a great variety
of response mechanisms. The whole process can be purely
reflexive, employing little logic other than that necessary for
controlling the flow of data.
     In the framework of evolutionary machine intelligence, a
purely reflexive mechanism represents the simplest sort of
machine. For the sake of keeping things straight, I have assigned
neat-sounding Greek letters to the various stages of robot
evolution. So a machine that is purely reflexive in nature is an
Alpha-Class machine.
     My Buster robot was an Alpha-Class robot. Its activities
were restricted to dealing with conditions in the immediate
environment. The creature existed in the moment and at its
particular place in the environment. Any notions of past or future
experiences or environmental conditions other than those of the
moment, are wholly irrevelant.
     It is very tempting, at this point, to draw an analogy,
between a simple Alpha-Class machine and the reflex arc found
in all vertebral animals. But remember, that drawing such
analogies at this level is bound to get you into trouble. The
trouble here is that the vertebral reflex arc exhibits programmed
qualities. Accidentally touch your finger on the heating elements
of a hot stove and your reflex arc will invariably call for a reflex
action—jerking your finger away.

                                                                 17


===== PDF PAGE 020 =====

      This sort of programmed activity is far too restrictive in the
context of robot machines. The moment you begin telling the
machine exactly what it is supposed to do, how it is suppose to
respond, you are asking for a whole lot of trouble. Consider the
robot experimenter crying for programming help, simply be¬
cause he finds the prospect of programming his robot to repond
to all possible contigencies a task of staggering proportions.
      It doesn’t take a whole lot of imagination to see that the
idea of programming a robot to deal with all possible environ¬
mental contingencies soon runs headlong into monsterous dif¬
ficulties. It’s precisely difficulties of this nature that signal a
need for approaching the situation from a fresh viewpoint. The
fresh viewpoint in this case is so simple that we have to pinch
ourselves to see whether or not it amounts to a nice dream—let
Alpha-Class machines respond randomly.
      All you must do is tell the machine it is supposed to do
something whenever a relevant change occurs in the environ¬
ment, then let the machine figure out, at random, what sort of
response allows it to adapt to that change.
      To be more specific, suppose you build a robot machine ±at
is capable of sensing an obstruction in its path and responding by
moving in any of 16 different directions. It first senses the
obstacle, and being programmed to respond at random, begins
trying various motions. Some will work and some will not. The
first one that works clears the problem and the machine is free
to roam around again.
      So what if the machine has to try maybe four different
responses before it discovers one that works? The result is the
same as a different sort of machine you programmed in advance
to make the right move the first time. Maybe the random-reflex
creature wasted some time and effort, but it does the job and
without using any memory other than that required for sensing
 that something has to be done!
      Thus, an Alpha-Class machine is one that makes purely
random and reflexive responses to conditions in its immediate
environment. It is a very real part of evolutionary intelligence
because it represents the first, elemental step in a heirarchy of
machines. It fits the adaptive nature of machine intelligence
because it is capable of generating new responses to meet new
conditions.
      The complexity of an Alpha-Class machine can be multiplied
to any desired extent. There can be any number of sensing
mechanisms and any number of response modes at its disposal.

18


===== PDF PAGE 021 =====

As long as the responses are purely reflexive and random in
nature, it remains an Alpha-Class machine.
      The notion of building an Alpha-Class machine with a vast
variety of sensory inputs and response mechanisms brings up an
intriguing question. Is it possible for an Alpha-Class machine
outfitted with a variety of high-resolution sensory inputs and
equally elaborate responsive outputs to appear to behave in a
quasi-rational fashion? The question must be answered one of
these days, and perhaps you are the one to do it, not in words,
but in deeds.
      Also, for the sake of clearer communication between robot
 experimenters, I have devised a scheme for classifying Alpha-
 Class robots even further. Using Roman numerals as a guide, an
Alpha I machine is an Alpha-Class machine that has only one
sensory mode and one response mode. An Alpha II machine on
the other hand, has either more than one sensory mode, more
than one response mode, or more than one of both.
      An example of an Alpha-I machine is one that senses only
obstacles in its path and responds-by finding a way to get around
them. An Alpha II, however, might sense both physical obstacles
and bright lights, responding in either case with some motion
activity.
      In this book, you will find computer programs for building
both Level-I and Level-II Alpha-Class creatures.
      A Beta-Class machine is simply an Alpha-Class mechanism
equipped with a memory of past experiences. The machine
exhibits Alpha-like behavior at first, but each time it stumbles
across a response that works it remembers that response, filing
it away at an address location determined by the nature of the
condition that elicited the response. So when the Beta creature
encounters the very same condition again in the future, it looks
to its previous response and tries it again.
      The overall impression is that the Beta-Class machine
behaves in a random fashion for a while. With experience,
however, the random. Alpha-like behavior begins giving way to
predominately Beta-Class behavior. The creature makes fewer
and fewer calls upon its random response mechanism, interact¬
ing with its environment in a more efficient manner.
      Adding a memory scheme to an Alpha-Class mechanism,
thereby creating a new order of machine, is a very natural and
logical step in the development of machine intelligence. It is
difficult to imagine any other sort of step that would be simpler
and yet exert such a change in the creature’s mode of behavior.

                                                              19


===== PDF PAGE 022 =====

     A Beta-Class machine is preprogrammed to do only two
things: to respond to relevant changes in its environment and
save workable responses in a memory. Exactly how the machine
responds and exactly what gets stored in the memory is largely
beyond the experimenter's control or, for that matter, the
experimenter's concern.
     If the Beta machine is further equipped to change its mind
as exact circumstances change, it is fully prepared to deal with
the environment in an adaptive fashion. The Alpha mechanism is
always there in the background, resting below the memory and
coming to the rescue whenever the creature encounters a new
situation or finds that an old response no longer works.
     The difference between a Beta-I and Beta-II machine has to
do with the number of input and output modes. Beta Is use a
single sensory mode and a single response mode of expression.
A Beta II has more than one of either sensory or response
modes, or more than one of each.
     A Level-Ill Beta creature, incidentally, would be one that
has more than a single-Alpha-Class function included within it. A
 Level-Ill robot creature, for example, might have a single
processor devoted to Beta-like learning activity, but several
more Alpha schemes for controlling manipulators or other exter¬
nal gadgets.
     Other than an evolutionary and adaptive perspective, there
is nothing really new about these Alpha and Beta machines. The
history of Alpha-Class machines goes all the way back to the
days when physiologists were constructing electronic models of
simple biological creatures, and the Beta-Class history reaches
back to the 1950s when researchers and high school science
students were building the first mechanical mice for solving
mazes.
     So in the evolutionary scheme of things, what comes after
adding some memory to a system that is capable of responding
to changes in its environment? Look at it this way. A purely
Alpha-Class machine exists in the moment. It has no way to
work with events of the past or future. A Beta-Class machine
can call upon successful solutions to past problems in order to
deal with the problems of the moment more effectively. What's
missing? What is missing is teh creature's ability to anticipate
events that might occur in the future.
     A Gamma-Class machine is one capable of generalizing
what it knows from first-hand experience to similar conditions

20


===== PDF PAGE 023 =====

not yet encountered in the environment. The machine works out
sets of “educated guesses” regarding the nature of possible
situations in its future, studies its own past experiences, and
generalizes relevant elements of those experiences, saving them
for a time when they might be needed.
     The Gamma generalization scheme is built right on top of a
Beta mechanism which, of course, is built upon the primitive
Alpha mechanism. So even a Gamma-Class robot begins its life
in an Alpha fashion, blundering its way around the environment,
remembering those responses that work. And like a Beta-Class
machine, Gamma soon behaves in a more direct manner, its
Alpha random behavior slipping away in favor of learned re¬
sponses.
      However, something else goes on in the “mind” of a
Gamma-Class creature. While it is in the process of building up
confidence in its learned, sucessful first-hand experiences, it is
conjecturing about ways to deal with other kinds of events.
Instead of resorting to purely Alpha-Class behavior when it
encounters a brand-new situation in the environment, a
Gamma-Class creature has a set of responses already residing in
memory.
      Those Gamma-generated responses are bits and pieces of
knowledge gained at various stages of its earlier life. The
conjectured response is immediately tried whenever the occa¬
sion arises. If this response happens to work, the creature’s
confidence grows and it has additional information for firming up
its notions about dealing with other future events. But in the
event a conjectured response is partly or, in some instances,
altogether wrong, the creature resorts to Alpha reflex activity.
      The memory of a Gamma-Class robot is in a state of
continuous fluctuation and change, at least as long as it is
interacting with a rich and dynamic environment. Put the
machine into a sterile environment and you will find very little
Gamma activity taking place. As a result, the creature will be
largely unprepared to deal with unforseen circumstances.
      So the evolutionary heirarchy begins with the primitive
Alpha-Class machine and builds quite logically to the Beta- and
Gamma-Class machines. The evolutionary procedure suits the
context of electronics quite well, and there is no need to make
any conscious references to basic biological activity. If, after
you’ve had a chance to investigate these mechanisms for your¬
self, you find the whole idea has some staggering implications.

                                                               21


===== PDF PAGE 024 =====

consider this—it is all done in a very simple fashion. If there is
anything more intriguing than the system itself, it is its simplic¬
ity.
     I have never calculated the amount of programming required
for various tasks demonstrated in this book, but Tm willing to
bet that at least half of it would be classified as housekeeping
chores for your computer. These would include the steps neces¬
sary for printing out various kinds of data on the screen, drawing
the images and getting test information in and out of the system.
      Another major portion of the programming has to do with
giving the creatures some sensory and responsive mechanisms.
There is absolutely no programming devoted to telling the creature
exactly what it is supposed to do under any particular set of
circumstances. An estimate of 25 man-years to program a machine
to respond to all possible contingencies is time and effort down
the drain. Let the machine program itself as the need arises, and
spend all that time dreaming up new ways to extend the machine
further and test the capabilities it has. Simplicity is the key to
success in any technological and scientific endeavor.
EAMI AND ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
     Through this chapter, I have made repeated and largely
negative references to the notion of drawing analogies between
biological activity and the fundamental workings of robots. It is
not my intention to demean work that has been carried out with
clear-cut objectives and scientific responsibility.
     Rather, my intention is to drive home the point that the
EAMI concept relies entirely on the notion that intelligent
machines must evolve in the context of machines, and not that of
physiology. If I have made that point clear to you, and you now
understand that even casual references to biological analogues
can, at this point, cause more confusion than an5lJiing else, we
can all forget about knocking the efforts of physiologically
oriented researchers.
     In fact, the EAMI concept complements the endeavors of
other kinds of robot research, once you get past the fundamental
levels, that is. One day soon, EAMI will develop to the point
where we are going to seek out the analogue builders with hat in
hand. We are going to need some of their elaborate sensory and
responsive mechanisms to transform the fundamental concepts of
EAMI into working machines.
     Of course, EAMI re-searchers will not apply the physiologi¬
cal models the same way, and there will be a need for simplify¬
ing many of these borrowed mechanisms. But as long as there

22


===== PDF PAGE 025 =====

are researchers who insist upon doing everything from a biologi¬
cal viewpoint, we ought to get along with them.
      So an KAMI machine must grow up in a purely machine-
oriented context. But even so, there comes a point where it is
tempting, and even desirable, to begin drawing parallels with the
animal world. Now I did not say we will be building KAMI
machines that mimic animal behavior, I said “drawing parallels.’’
      You won’t have to work your way very far into this book
before you begin noticing forms of behavior that appear quite
animal-like. It is at the behavioral level that parallels beween
EAMI and the animal world become legitimate.
      If we are to seek ideas outside the realm of electronics and
computer science, the appropriate place to look is the lab of the
animal psychologist. Indeed, if you have any acquaintance at all
with the fundamentals of animal psychology, you will find some
familiar expressions scattered through the experiments in this
book. You will find terms such as learning curve, adaptive
behavior, and behavioral reinforcement. In fact, the use of the
word memory in this book refers more often to the psychologist’s
view than to the engineer’s.
      EAMI is inseparable from the science of psychology, simply
because it is a behavior mechanism applied to machines. In a
sense, we are far more interested in dealing with machine
behavior and psychology than the mechanisms required for doing
the job. It just so happens that EAMI is the simplest, most
efficient, and effective way to get a machine operating at a level
where its psychology can be studied in a meaningful way.
      Bear in mind, however, that we are not building psychologi¬
cal models either. Building a creature that does nothing but
solve mazes defeats the purpose of the whole effort and puts us
right back into the seat of robotics 25 years ago.
      Like the animal psychologist, we have a creature sitting in
front of us that demands study in its own right. The creature
already exists, both with its strengths and its shortcomings. Our
job is not to build a machine that does a particular set of tasks;
that’s old hat. The idea is to study a creature that already exists
and learn as much as possible about its behavior. The work is
more fun that way and a whole lot more meaningful in the long
run.
A WORD ABOUT DEMONSTRATING EAMI SYSTEMS
      We all do things such as build robots or simulate robot
intelligence on a computer for various personal reasons. One
such reason, I think most of us have to confess, is that of

                                                                23


===== PDF PAGE 026 =====

impressing other people with the things are able to do. For your
own sake, I hope that is not your most compelling reason for
wanting to simulate robot intelligence.
      The problem with trying to impress other people with this
idea is that it doesn’t impress them at all. The whole affair
comes across looking like some sort of video game, and a cheap
one at that. If your enthusiasm for the project is founded upon
the idea of impressing other people, you are in for a terrible
disappointment.
      The only people who will truly appreciate what you are
doing are those who understand the problem you are solving.
Most folks want to see gadgets clanking around the room,
responding to voice commands and doing neat, but banal, things
such as washing the dishes.Show them a little blinking square of
light bouncing around on a computer screen, exhibiting the germ
of innate machine intelligence that marks a bridge between living
and non-living things, and ±ey’ll wonder whether you have lost
your marbles.
      The situation has gotten so bad in my own case that I no
longer demonstrate my robots and intelligence simulators unless
the observers are willing to sit still for a crash course in KAMI,
something along the lines of the material presented in this
chapter. Even then, people walk away, wishing they had seen a
thing sweeping up the mess of papers and bits of electronic parts
that generally clutter the floor in my office.
      I suppose we are facing the same sort of situation that
plagued film producers in the very early days of cinema. Many
people seeing a movie for the first time in their lives thought the
whole thing was a hoax. It sounds naive to us these days, but
there was a prevailing impression that the moving images were
being created by a whole cast of players working behind that big,
flat, white sheet on the stage.
      There is great potential for hoaxes in the robot business
these days, and there are some pretty smart people who are
going to give the public exactly what they want, snazzy machines
that add up to nothing. And, that’s going to make things even
tougher for those of us who are working diligently along the
proper path.
      I suppose the thought is potentially depressing, but it
certainly does not make serious robot work a waste of time and
effort. We know what we are doing, and that’s really what
counts. Besides, it’s a lot of fun and it offers some very thrilling
moments. That counts for something, doesn’t it?

24


===== PDF PAGE 027 =====

            Getting The Most From
       This Book And Your Work


The primary purpose of this book is to give you a chance to see
artificial intelligence at work on the monitor screen of your
personal computer. It isn't all a matter of simple demonstration,
however. You will have plenty of invitations to play some games
with the creatures, invent new games, and do some scientific
research and experiments.
      I suspect the people reading this book run the gamut from
very beginners at programming computers to both amateur
experts and professionals. As you might suspect, it is quite a
challenge to prepare a book that is both meaningful and interest¬
ing to such a broad spectrum of users.
      Then, there is the challenge of writing a book—one that is
essentially a book about using computer programs — for people
who might not have access to the same computer I happen to
use. Well, here's how it's done.

LAYOUT OF THE PROJECTS AND PROGRAMS
     This book can be divided roughly into three parts. The first
part deals with Alpha-Class creatures, the second with Beta-
Class versions, and the third part deals with Gamma-Class
creatures. That's pretty simple.
     After you see that the book is divided up by creature class,
you'll then find Level-I and Level-II versions. This classification
has nothing to do with Level-I and Level-II BASIC for the
TRS-80 personal computers. All of the work assumes your
computer has the capability of Radio Shack's Level-II BASIC.
What these expressions mean is Alpha I and Alpha H, for
example. Sorry about the potential for confusion.
     So the book begins with work on Alpha I creatures and then
moves to Alpha II versions. Then comes some Beta I projects,
followed by a few Beta II projects. Finally, you will find some

                                                                25


===== PDF PAGE 028 =====

Gamma I projects and a few hints on programming a Gamma II
creature.
     That is the general scheme of the book. It begins with
primitive Alpha creatures and moves gradually through Beta and
Gamma versions. In other words, it follows the same evolutio¬
nary process outline in Chapter 1.
     Leafing casually through the pages of this book, you will see
a whole lot of computer program listings. I have discovered from
my own experience that entering programs into a computer can
get to be a very boring and tedious task, when it all has to be
done by hand at the keyboard, that is.
     In order to relieve some of this programming tedium, the
programs have been designed so that they can be entered in
smaller, bite-sized pieces. You will find an extensive use of
subroutines and their corresponding GOSUB statements. Or¬
ganizing the programs around so many subroutines makes it
possible to work out new programs based on large sections of
earlier programs. The result is that you rarely have to enter an
entire program from scratch. Here is how it works.
     Suppose you are getting started in Chapter 3, the first
chapter that contains any Alpha-I programming. This doesn’t
happen to be a very extensive program, and being fresh on the
job, you probably won’t be too frustrated by having to enter it
from the keyboard in its entirety.
     After you get this first Alpha-I program into your machine,
tested and debugged (more to say about testing and debugging in
a moment), you are ready to play with it. Here’s the important
point—before going to the next program in the sequence, save
the first one on cassette tape, then load the new program “on
top of’ the older one, not on cassette tape, but in the computer
memory.
     All but about four of the programs in this book are built
around portions of other programs which can already be residing
in program memory when you begin entering them. Maybe 5 or
6 subroutines called by one program can be used in the next
program. There is no need to enter them all from scratch.
Simply build the new program around the subroutines already in
place.
    The instructions for entering a new program clearly specify
which one of the older programs must be entered from cassette

26


===== PDF PAGE 029 =====

tape first and then specifies which of the older subroutines are to
be used and which ones should be deleted. What could be a
terribly long and tedious procedure thus becomes a simple set of
programming steps.
      Using this idea of duplicating subroutines, building the bulk
of one new program around subroutines for an older program
forces you to do a couple of things, however. First, you cannot
expect to take advantage of this time-saving technique if you
skip around in the book. You must enter the programs as they
are presented here. What good is the technique if you skip to a
program that calls for building around subroutines from an
earlier program you haven’t done?
      Perhaps the other demand is obvious, you must save each
completed program on cassette tape. Not all programs are built
around the previous one. Some call for loading programs found a
couple of chapters earlier in the book. So you ought to be
prepared to save every program on cassette tape and keep an
accurate index of where those programs are on the tape. In other
words, work the programs in the exact order they appear in this
book and save all of them on cassette tape.
      Now for this matter of testing and debugging the programs.
Some of the programs are rather short and simple, but of course
this isn’t always the case. Entering so many programs brings up
the distinct possibility of making errors and many kinds of errors
will ‘‘bomb” the whole program.
      For the sake of novices who haven’t done a whole lot of
computer programming, you will find some specific steps for
testing programs and subroutines. Whether or not you think you
have entered the program with absolutely no errors, it is a good
idea to follow the suggested testing routines. That way, you will
be able to uncover errors before they become lost in a large
listing and cause real problems.
      Since all of these programs have been carefully tested and
proven, the general procedure for working out an error is
comparing your program listing with the printouts appearing at
the end of each chapter. I must say, however, that I cannot take
the responsibility for errors if you fail to follow the instructions
to the letter.
      There is more to this business of doing research with
machine intelligence than entering the programs and watching
the critters do their thing on the screen. I am convinced that you
must also understand exactly how the programs work, right

                                                                 27


===== PDF PAGE 030 =====

down to the tiniest detail. If you do not take the trouble to
understand how the programs work, you cannot possibly make a
convincing case for anything we have to say about evolutionary
adaptive machine intelligence.
     To this end, most of the text in each chapter is devoted to
the theory of operation of the programs. The programs are first
presented in the form of flowcharts, followed by segments of
programs and subroutines that are directly related to the blocks
on the flowchart. You thus have a chance to study the program in
bite-sized pieces, relating it to the flowchart and hopefully
understanding what each line of the program does and why it
does it.
     So when you begin studying a new program, you will find a
flowchart, some theory of operation, and then a complete listing
of program lines that are either new or unique to that particular
program. Subroutines that are borrowed from earlier programs
are listed by subroutine numbers and names, but neither listed
nor discussed again in any great detail
     Having the programs broken up into bits and pieces makes
it much easier to study and enter into your computer. At the
same time, though, the procedure makes it difficult to doub¬
lecheck a complete program listing. For this reason, you will
find complete program listings at the end of each chapter. Any
problems, errors, and points of confusion, which might be hidden
away in the main text of a chapter, can be readily resolved by
comparing your entire program listing with the version printed
at the end of the chapter.
     I am sure it will occur to some experimenters that they can
enter the programs from the composite listings at the end of the
chapters. Please don’t do things that way. Not only will you end
up doing a lot more work than necessary, but also run the risk of
playing around with programs you don’t understand. The whole
purpose of the composite listings at the end of the chapters is to
diagnose any errors that might crop up.

AN INVITATION TO EXPERIMENT AND PLAY
      Much of the fun and excitement of this whole subject of
machine intelligence would be lost if all the work is presented as
straightforward demonstrations. Demonstrations, as such, might
have some educational value, but they rarely stir a sense of
lasting excitement. The work in this book is designed to let you
have some fun with the creatures and look forward to doing

28


===== PDF PAGE 031 =====

some original research of your own. Then too, it is possible to
write programs that get the creatures to do some fascinating and
sometimes humorous sorts of things. While there is a certain
brand of fun and excitement associated with doing serious re¬
search, I see nothing wrong with pursuing some fanciful ideas for
the fun of it.
     Scientific research should never be the sole property of one
individual. Being in the forefront of this matter of evolutionary
adaptive intelligence, I have the chance to do a lot of research
that has never been done before. This does not mean it is a
waste of your time to duplicate the work, however. In fact, I
encourage every experimenter to duplicate the experiments,
refine my conclusions, and look for loopholes that might have
escaped my attention. I also encourage you to extend the work
as far as you can. Fm not going to get all uptight about anyone
publishing articles and writing books about projects I could have
done myself. You shouldn’t worry about others “beating you to
the punch,” either. There is far too much work to be done to
mess around with trivial matters such as jealousy. All I ask is
that you carry out original research in the same spirit I present it
here — carefully, thoroughly, and with a sense of responsibility.
     In the final chapter of this book, I outline rather clearly the
things I plan to do next with the KAMI concept. I invite you to
follow the same path, and if you happen to get the job done
before I do, that’s all right. We can compare results, work out
any discrepancies and go on from there.
     In that final chapter, I also suggest some avenues that have
to be opened sooner or later, but ones I do not intend to pursue
myself. Get moving gang! Work your way through the theories,
projects, and programs spelled out in this book, and then start
doing your own thing. Let’s see if we can help make robotics
something beyond a tinkerer’s art by 1985.

THE NEED TO CONSERVE MEMORY SPACE
     At first glance, many experimenters might find the BASIC
programs looking a bit strange. The program lines are written
without the benefit of any spaces between words, expressions,
and characters; and what’s more, most of the lines are multiple-
statement lines.
     The reason for doing this is to save valuable program
memory space that would otherwise have to be devoted to
characters for spaces and line numbers. Getting the programs to

                                                                 29


===== PDF PAGE 032 =====

fit into the smallest personal computer system is more important
than writing programs in a way that simply makes them a bit
easier to read.
      It doesn’t take a lot of experience with these space-saving
techniques to see what is going on, however. If you find yourself
getting confused by the lack of spaces between some of the
words and characters, there’s no harm in dividing them with a
light pencil stroke in the book. You will get accustomed to
reading the crammed-together program formats after a while.

A WORD TO READERS WHO DO NOT HAVE A TRS-80
     All of the programs presented in this book assume you are
using a Radio Shack TRS-80 personal computer with Level-II
BASIC and at least 4K of memory. The choice of this particular
machine is based on cold facts. No matter what your opinion of
that machine might be, it is a matter of record that there are
twice as many TRS-80 users as there are Apple and PET users
combined. If you happen to be using one of the more sophisti¬
cated S-100 oriented systems, you probably know enough about
computer programming to make the necessary adjustments any¬
way.
     Apple and PET users should not feel completely left out of
this project, however. While these machines employ the BASIC
language, there are some small but significant differences. To
this end, every program is presented in the form of a flowchart.
The flowcharts are portable; that is to say, they apply to any
kind of machine that uses any sort of BASIC.
     So if you aren’t using a TRS-80, you can use the flowcharts
as guides for devising the appropriate programs. One of my own
immediate objectives is to produce an Apple version of this
book, but don’t wait around for me to do the job for you. For one
thing, there is a terribly long delay from the time one makes
such a program and the time it appears in print. Then too, you
will miss out on the chance to learn a lot about making transla¬
tions between the languages of two different machines, a talent
that is badly needed in both amateur and professional circles
these days.




30


===== PDF PAGE 033 =====

                 Alpha-1 Basic —
              The Starting Point
                                                       <  >    ■




                                                       LI
Just as the entire scheme of adaptive machine intelligence is an
evolutionary one, so is the process of building up simulation pro¬
grams for demonstrating it. It all starts with the ALPHA-I
BASIC described in this chapter and then it builds up from there.
Every program described in this book has some ALPHA-I
BASIC features in it. So the work you are about to do now has
relevance to everything you’ll be doing in the future.
     Since ALPHA-I BASIC is the foundation to all other work,
it is most important to understand how it works and what it
means. If you are careless with your study and programming at
this point. I’m afraid you will have to pay for it dearly later on.
Study the overall concept, the subroutines, and even the indi¬
vidual lines and statements carefully. They will all be used time
and again in later programs, but without the benefit of extensive
explanations.

THE NATURE OF ALPHA-I BASIC
      ALPHA-I BASIC is the simplest possible form of adaptive
intelligence. The creature’s purpose is to move about in a
well-defined environment, doing whatever it can to ensure free¬
dom of motion within that environment. Its responses are purely
random in nature with only two restrictions upon its behavior.
First, the creature must remain within the confines of its
environment, and second, it must not be allowed to stop moving.
      Both of these restrictions have their counterparts in the real
world. The real world, for instance, does have barriers of some
sort that limit the range of a creature’s activities. These might
be physical barriers such as walls, the surface tension of a drop
of water, the forces of gravity that confines creatures to the
surface of a planet, or, in the most esoteric sense, the abstract


===== PDF PAGE 034 =====

confines of a 3-dimensional space and the forward-pointing arrow
of time.
      The creature represented by ALPHA-I BASIC is confined to
a rectangular field drawn on the screen. All the creature ever
perceives and does is restricted to the confines of this rectangle
— existence outside this world rectangle has no relevance
whatsoever. The creature’s activities must be limited to the area
enclosed by the rectangle. And, in the case of ALPHA-I BASIC,
its total mode of behavior is one of avoiding the possibility of
leaving that little world.
      In fact, the purpose of the creature in ALPHA-I BASIC is to
actively engage the barriers of its little world, and the need for
actively engaging the barriers precludes the possibility of stand¬
ing totally motionless. Motion is the essence of the creature’s
behavior and existence, and allowing it to stand motionless
within its world defeats its purpose for being created in the first
place.
     As far as the ALPHA-I BASIC creature is concerned, the
need to pursue continuous motion is built into its very nature.
This will not be the case for some ALPHA-II and some of the
higher-order creatures (standing motionless can, indeed, be a
legitimate and useful response where the range of perceptions
and modes of behavior are sufficiently complex).
     In a few words then, an ALPHA-I BASIC creature is
characterized by continuous and random motion within the con¬
fines of a rectangle. Its purpose in “life” is to pursue freedom of
motion, and the adaptive quality of its behavior is one of finding
ways to keep moving in spite of changes in its barriers.
THE ALPHA-I BASIC SCREEN FORMAT
     Figure 3-1 shows the screen format for the ALPHA-I
BASIC experiments. It is simply a rectangle drawn on the
screen and a small square representing the creature, itself.
Incidentally, the drawing is shown here with blacks and whites
reversed. The border and creature figures are both white against
a black background. For the sake of showing clearer pictures,
this convention is used throughout the entire book.

THE ALPHA-I BASIC FLOWCHART
     The general flowchart for ALPHA-I BASIC is shown in Fig.
3-2. It is a rather simple flowchart, but since it will be incorpo¬
rated in virtually every experiment described in ±is book, it is
one worthy of some very close study at this time.

32


===== PDF PAGE 035 =====

Fig. 3-1.Screen format for ALPHA-I BASIC .

      The program begins with a short heading that, for the sake
of the experimenter, describes the nature of the program. In this
case, the heading does little more than identify the program as
one for ALPHA-I BASIC.
      Upon displaying the heading, the experimenter initiates the
active part of the program by satisfying the START conditional.
The heading remains displayed on the screen as long as the
“answer’' to the START conditional is N (no). In this particular
case, striking the ENTER or RETURN key satisfies the START
conditional and causes the DRAW FIELD operation to take
place. DRAW FIELD is responsible for drawing the rectangle on
the screen. It’s nothing more than that.
      The INITIALIZE step merely gets the creature started in
its little life on the screen. As you will see later, INITIALIZE
begins the creature’s motion near the upper left-hand comer of
its rectangle world and causes it to move downward and slightly
to the right. Actually, INITIALIZE, simply sets up the creature
for its first incremental move across the rectangle. SET NEXT
MOVE compiles the initial information and translates it into a
specific motion code.

                                                              33


===== PDF PAGE 036 =====

     Next comes the CONTACT conditional. The CONTACT
question is this: Will the next move, the one compiled by SET
NEXT MOVE, make me run into a barrier? The answer 0^ or N)
determines what happens after that. If there will be no contact
with the border, the N route from CONTACT jumps down to the
MOVE operation.
     MOVE actually executes the incremental move that is
compiled by SET NEXT MOVE. Since the creature is free to
move, the little white square representing the creature moves
one incremental step across the screen. After doing this little
MOVE, the system sets up the next move at SET NEXT
MOVE, the move is checked for CONTACT, and if there will be
no contact, the creature moves yet another step.
     The SET NEXT MOVE, CONTACT, and MOVE looping
sequence continues until CONTACT shows a Y condition, a
condition indicating that the next move will result in a contact
with the border figure. The creature, in other words, moves
across the screen in a regular, stepwise fashion until it finds the
next move will cause a contact situation. As far as the observer
is concerned, the creature square seems to move ra±er
smoothly and in a straight line across the screen until it encoun¬
ters the edge of its world.
     The speed and direction of motion is mainly determined by
SET NEXT MOVE. When the program is first started, the
parameters for SET NEXT MOVE are dictated by INITIALIZE.
As mentioned earlier in this section, INITIALIZE sets the first
element of motion from the upper left-hand comer of the border
and down toward the middle of the lower boundary. This initial
motion is the only one that is dictated by the program. All
motion thereafter is determined by the machine itself.
     So far in this explanation, the creature has been initialized
and moved in a stepwise fashion toward the bottom of the border
figure. The SET NEXT MOVE, CONTACT=N, and MOVE
sequence remains in force until the creature makes its first
contact with the border figure. Now suppose this first contact
has indeed been anticipated for the next move. The answer to
the first CONTACT conditional is Y, and the system enters a
different operating loop composed of BLINK, FETCH NEW
MOVE, DECODE, and a second CONTACT conditional.
     So upon seeing the next move would result in an undesira¬
ble contact with the border figure, the flowchart shows a BLINK
— the creature figure is simply blinked on and off one time.

34


===== PDF PAGE 037 =====

Fig. 3-2. General flowchart for ALPHA-1 BASIC.


                                                 35


===== PDF PAGE 038 =====

Immediately after that, the program selects a random code for
the next speed and direction. As described a bit later, the
randomly generated motion code must be decoded before it can
be tested for CONTACT again.
     If the new motion code results in another contact, the loop
is repeated: BLINK, FETCH NEW MOVE, DECODE, and
CONTACT. This motion-code selection loop remains in force
until it stumbles across a motion code that will not cause a
contact. The answer to the second CONTACT conditional is N,
and the system enters its original motion-producing sequence of
operations: MOVE, SET NEXT MOVE, and CONTACT.
     When the experimenter first starts the program, the crea¬
ture figure can be seen moving diagonally across the screen.
This apparent motion continues until the creature seems to make
contact with the lower part of the border. At that moment, it
blinks on and off an undetermined number of times, maybe just
once or maybe six or even eight times. It just sits there blinking
each time it picks a new motion code until it happens to pick one
that carries it away from the border figure.
     With selection of a randomly generated motion code (speed
and direction) that frees it from the border, the creature appears
to move along until it runs into the border again. At this point,
there is no way to say exactly where the creature will be going.
After the initial excursion from the upper left-hand comer of the
border figure, there’s no telling how the creature will respond
upon sensing contact with the border.
     While watching the ALPHA-I BASIC creature in action, you
might want to think of an amoeba scurrying around in a drop of
water. It is a vigorous and mindless activity which is confined,
and largely dictated by, the confines of the surface tension of the
water drop. At the same time, however, be sure you do not fall
into the trap of thinking you have something that is mimicking
the behavior of a living organism. The ALPHA-I BASIC creature
is a machine creature in its own right; the fact that its behavior
appears similar to that of an organic creature must not be
allowed to confuse the real importance of what you will be
observing on the screen.
SUBROUTINES FOR ALPHA-I BASIC
     The ALPHA-I BASIC program is composed of five sub¬
routines and one main program which pulls the subroutines
together. The subroutines, as indicated on the flowchart in Fig.
3-2, are as follows:

36


===== PDF PAGE 039 =====

S. 500HEADING/START
S. 600 INITIALIZE
S. 725 CONTACT
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE


     Of course, the main program will call these subroutines at
the appropriate times by executing a GOSUB line number state¬
ment, where line number is the designated subroutine
number—500, 600, 725, and so on.
     The flowcharts for later program will use many of the same
labels for the operational blocks, and, in fact, the same sub¬
routine line numbers. This procedure allows you to relate blocks
on the flowchart directly to program subroutines. As a matter of
further convenience, an S. 600 INITIALIZE block appearing on
one flowchart does essentially the same job as an S. 600
INITIALIZE block does on some other flowchart in the book. So
once you understand the main purpose of a subroutine, you can
generalize the notion to other programs that use it.
     However, the exact program statements contained in a
subroutine often varies somewhat from one program situation to
another. Although two different programs might have flowcharts
showing S. 600 INITIALIZE, and although they perform es¬
sentially the same task, the programming might be slightly
different. For this reason, the subroutines actually entered into
the computer carry slightly different names.
     For example, the S. 600 INITIALIZE block in this flowchart
carries the REM name INITIAL-1. A flowchart in the next
chapter also shows a block labeled S. 600 INITIALIZE, but since
the actual programming is slightly different, its REM name is
INITIAL-2.
     While this nomenclature might seem to be rather awkward
or confusing at this time, it is only because it is an attempt to
deal with the whole project at once. The idea is to simplify
matters by using the same flowchart designations and GOSUB
line numbers for similar kinds of operations throughout the book.
If you do not grasp the significance of this right now, you will
find yourself taking advantage of it anyway. Sooner or later you'll
catch on.

Subroutine 500 HEADING/START
     This is the heading subroutine for ALPHA-I BASIC. To
distinguish it from other 500 HEADING operations, it is de¬
signated HEADING-l.In line 505, HEADING-1 clears the screen.

                                                                37


===== PDF PAGE 040 =====

After that, it displays the messages RODNEY ALPHA-I and
BASIC VERSION (lines 510 and 515).
     The message, DO ENTER TO START, is part of an INPUT
statement in line 525, and the only way to get out of this
subroutine is by striking the ENTER key. Doing so, the value of
string variable S$ is defined as the null string, but since it isn’t
used anywhere else in the program, the actual definition isn’t
relevant. Line 525 merely gives the experimenter a chance to
rest in the HEADING/START condition until striking the
ENTER key.

     500 REM ** HEADING-1 **
     505 CIS
     510 PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY ALPHA-fiPRINT
     515 PRINTTAB (25) “BASIC VERSION”
     520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
     525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”;S$:RETURN

     Variables introduced: L, S$

     Variables required at start: none

     Test Routine
     1OCLS:GOSUB500
     20CLS:PRINT“OK”
     3OINPUTX$:GOTO10

      As indicated here, HEADING-1 introduces variables L and
S$. Since HEADING-1 is executed only one time, when the pro¬
gram is first started, these two variables can be redefined and
applied to other functions anywhere in the program.
HEADING-1 requires no variables at the start. It can be run, in
other words, without the need for defining any variables.
      The test routine for HEADING-1 is a rather simple one.
After entering HEADING-1 into your system, using the line
numbers designated here, it can be tested with the specified test
routine. Enter the test routine and then enter the RUN com¬
mand.
       K all has gone well, you should see the heading messages
printed out neatly on the screen. Striking the ENTER key
causes the program to return to line 20 of test routine which
clears the messages from the screen and prints OK in the upper
 left-hand comer.
       According to line 30 of the test routine, the INPUTX$
allows you to repeat the test sequence any number of times by
simply striking the ENTER key again.

38


===== PDF PAGE 041 =====

     If you’re ready to go to work on ALPHA-1 BASIC, get
HEADING-1 into your machine and check it out. Be sure to
delete the test routine when you’re satisfied the subroutine is
working properly.


Subroutine 550 DRAW FIELD
    The purpose of S. 550 DRAW FIELD, wherever it might
appear in this book, is to draw the creature’s rectangular border.
The configuration of the border varies somewhat in later pro¬
grams; so although S. 550 DRAW FIELD appears on virtually all
the main flowcharts, the actual subroutine program has to carry
unique names. In this instance it is called FIELD-1.
   550 REM ♦ FIELD-1 **
   552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383
   555 FORF=F1TOF2:POKEF, 131:NEXT
   560 FORF=F3TOF4:POKEF, 176:NEXT
   565 FORF=F1TOF4STEP64;POKEF,191:NEXT
   570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:POKEF.191 :NEXT
   557 RETURN

    Variables introduced: FI, F2, F3, F4, F
    Variables required at start: none
  Test routine
    10 CLS;GOSUB550
    20 INPUTX$:GOTO10
     This drawing subroutine uses TRS-80 POKE graphic to
draw the border configuration shown in Fig. 3-1. Line 552
defines the size of the rectangle, while lines 555 through 570
actually draw it on the screen. In this case, line 555 draws the
top of the border, line 560 draws the bottom, and lines 565 and
570 draw the left- and right-hand sides respectively.
     Strictly speaking, the size-determining variables, FI
through F4, need not be defined separately as is done in line
522. Line 555, for example, could be written as: 555
F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF,131:NEXT. This would cer¬
tainly save variable space in the computer memory and speed up
operations a little bit. In later projects, however, you will be
changing the size of the border figure and, in fact, using its
parameters as reference points for drawing other figures on the
screen.
     In the long run, defining the border in terms of variables FI
through F4 gives the subroutine a degree of usefulness and
flexibility that would be lost otherwise.

                                                               39


===== PDF PAGE 042 =====

     The variables introduced by FIELD-1 are border paramet¬
ers FI through F4 and a drawing variable F. F serves its entire
purpose through this subroutine and can thus be redefined and
used for other purposes in other subroutines. Variables FI
through F4, however, ought to be reserved. The subroutine
requires no initializing values, so it can be tested and run
without having to set up any values ahead of time.
     When you are ready to go, enter FIELD-1 into your compu¬
ter using the designated line numbers. Test the routine with the
simple test program. The test program merely clears the screen
and calls FIELD-1. You know everything is in good working
order when you see a nice, clean rectangle drawn on the screen.
Line 20 in the test routine lets you clear the screen and redraw
the border any number of times by simply striking the ENTER
key.

Subroutine 600 Initialize
     For the purposes of this particular program, the 600 IN¬
ITIALIZE block in the flowchart takes the form of INITIAL-1 in
the programming.
     For the time being, it is sufficient to say that this sub¬
routine initializes the motion of the ALPHA-1 creature. The
values of variables X and Y determine the actual coordinates of
the creature on the screen—-at position 10, 10 in this case. The
values of I and J determine the velocity of the creature’s motion,
with I being the horizontal component and J being the vertical
component of motion.
     There will be much more explained about the position
coordinates, X and Y, and the velocity vectors, I and J, later in
this section. The simple purpose of the INITIAL-1 subroutine
would be lost in a detailed discussion at this point, though.
     Here is the simple INITIAL-1 subroutine:
     600 REM ** INITIAL-1 *•
     610 X=10:Y=10:I=I:J=1
     620 RETURN
      Variables introduced: X, Y, I, J
      Variables required at start: none
     One might argue that this little program is too simple to be
designated as a separate subroutine. That might be the case, but
since it is used so frequently throughout the work in this book, it
is given its own place as a subroutine, thereby making it
unnecessary to type it into the machine each time you begin
building up a new program.

40


===== PDF PAGE 043 =====

725 CONTACT Conditional Subroutine

     From the perspective of a flowchart analysis, the purpose of
the CONTACT conditional is to determine whether or not the
creature's next move is going to make it hit or jump over the
border figure. The creature must be kept within the confines of
its rectangle, and CONTACT is the scheme responsible for
doing the job.

     The CON SENSE-1 subroutine is one of several contact¬
sensing schemes to be used in this book. In this case, the
system scans the path in front of the moving creature, looking
for a lighted screen segment that indicates an obstacle in its
path. In the ALPHA-I BASIC program, the only possible obsta¬
cle is the border drawing, and that's what the CON SENSE-1
subroutine looks for.
     As in the case of the INITIAL-1 subroutine, it is difficult to
describe the finer features of CON SENSE-1 until you have gone
through a detailed explanation of how the creature moves on the
screen. For the time being, you can look over the programming
for the subroutine without worrying too much about how and
why certain functions and statements are used. Lines 745 and
750 do contain some information you can appreciate at this time.

      Whenever CON SENSE-1 picks up a potential contact with
an obstacle, it sets variable CO equal to 1 before returning to
the main program. If, on the other hand, the path ahead appears
to be clear, CON SENSE-1 returns with CO equal to 0. This
feature is noted on both of the CONTACT conditional blocks on
the flowchart in Fig. 3-2.
725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 ♦*
730 F0RXP=2T02-hABS{l):F0RYP=1T01 -I-ABS(J)
735IFPOINT(X-t-SGN(l)*XP,Y-l-SGN(J)*YP=-1THEN75
740 NEXT:NEXT
745 CO=1:RETURN
750CO=1:RETURN
   Variables introduced: CO, XP, YP
   Variables required to start: X, Y, I, J
650 FETCH NEW MOVE Subroutine
     This is the operation that is responsible for selecting a new
set of speed/direction motion vectors for the creature. Accord-

                                                                41


===== PDF PAGE 044 =====

  ing to the flowchart in Fig. 3-2, this subroutine is called only
  when CONTACT senses an impending obstacle and generates a
0 value of CO equal to 1.
       Here is the program version of this operation:
  650 REM ** FETCH NEW-1 **
  660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5)
  665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660
  670 RETURN
 Variables introduced: RI, RJ
 Variables required at start: none
 Test routine
  1OGOSUB650
  20 PRINTRI,RJ
  30 GOTO10


      This subroutine doesn’t require an extensive understanding
 of the overall system to appreciate how it works. Line 660
 simply generates two random numbers between 1 and 5. These
 integer values are assigned to variables RI and RJ.
      Line 665 is responsible for eliminating the condition where
 both random integers are equal to 3. As shown a bit later in this
 section, a pair of 3s would result in a stop code. They would
 cause the creature to stop moving on the screen, and in the
 context of the simple ALPHA-I BASIC system, this particular
 option cannot be tolerated; the creature, in effect, would die on
 the spot. Line 665 eliminates the stop code by cycling the
 program back to 660 where it takes another crack at picking a
 combination of numbers. Control returns to the main program
 only if the values of RI and RJ are not both equal to 3.
      If you load FETCH NEW-1 and the suggested test routine
 into your system, entering RUN will cause an endless pair of
 columns to appear on the screen. The columns will be composed
 of integers between 1 and 5 inclusively, but any given pair
 should not be equal to 3.

 THE MAIN PROGRAM
      The main program follows the flowchart in Fig. 3-2, calling
 the necessary subroutines and finishing up the flowchart by
 adding a few other operational steps. This program is named
 ALPHA-1, BASIC-1 MASTER.

 42


===== PDF PAGE 045 =====

      Line 10 calls subroutine 500, the heading/start subroutine.
After the subroutine, the program clears the screen (line 15),
draws the border figure (Subroutine 550 called by line 20), and
initializes the creature’s position and motion (Subroutine 600
called by line 30).

5 REM    ALPHA-1, BASIC-1 MASTER **
1OGOSUB500
15CLS
2OGOSUB550
3OGOSUB600
40X=X-hl:Y=Y-l-J
50GOSUB725
6OIFCO=OTHEN80
65 SET(X,Y):SET(X-I-1 ,Y):RESET(X.Y):RESET(X-I-1 ,Y):GOSUB650
70 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
75IFCO=1THEN65
80 SET(X,Y):SET(X-I-1 ,Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X-I-1 ,Y(
85 G0T04

Line 40 is responsible for setting up the next position for the
creature. It is represented by the SET NEXT MOVE block on
the flowchart.
      It is really a rather simple set of statements. The X variable
represents the horizontal position of the creature at any given
moment, and I represents the horizontal component of the
creature’s motion. So if the creature’s X position happens to be
20 and the I vector is +2, the first part of line 40 will set a new
value of X at 20+2, or 11. The Y variable, by the same token,
represents the current vertical position of the little creature, and
J is the vertical component of its motion. So if Y happens to be
equal to 15 and J is -2, it computes the second half of line 40 to
establish a new Y position of 15-2, or 13.
      The integer values of X and Y can be anywhere between
zero and some positive number that is dictated by the graphics
format of the computer. In the case of Radio Shack’s TRS-80, X
values can be anywhere between 0 and 127, while the Y values
can run anywhere between 0 and 47.
      According to line 40 of the main program, the X and Y
coordinates are actually determined by the values of vectors I
and J. The larger these values happen to be, the faster the
values of X and Y change. This means the larger the values of I
and J, the faster the creature appears to move across the screen.
      The range of values for vectors I and J are fixed at integers
between -2 and +2 inclusively. This range is determined by our
own programming, rather than by the nature of the computer.

                                                                 43


===== PDF PAGE 046 =====

     Figure 3-3 shows all possible motion vectors that can be
derived from this I, J format. The arrows indicate the direction
of motion and the lengths of the arrows indicate the relative
speed of motion. You can see that the creature has 24 different
motion vectors at its disposal, 24 different combinations of
directions and speeds. Having two sets of numbers between —2
and +2 actually provides 25 possible combinations, but the 0,0
combination is eliminated.          is 1=0, J=0 eliminated? Plug
those valued for I and J into line 40 of the master program, and
you will see that there is no change in the creature’s position. A
0,0 vector combination causes the creature to stand motionless
on the screen. That’s why the combination is eliminated from the
drawing in Fig. 3-3.
     Recall that the INITIAL-1 subroutine sets the values of I
and J at 1. The creature thus begins his life on the screen by
moving in the 1,1 direction, and you can see from Fig. 3-3 that
this combination carries the creature at an angle downward and
to the right at a moderate speed.
     If you are accustomed to working with X-Y graphs in the
context of engineering and analytic geometry, you might be
disturbed by a couple of secondary features of the graph in Fig.
3-3. For one thing, the positive and negative senses of the
vertical components are reversed from the conventional mode.
This is necessary in this case because the TRS-80 screen format
calls for moving downward by increasing the values of the Y
coordinate, and to move upward, the values of Y must be
decreased. Hence, the need for having -J toward the top of the
screen and +J toward the bottom. The horizontal components of
motion follow the usual convention, wi± positive motion being
toward the right and negative motion toward the left.
     Another little feature is the fact that the TRS-80 screen
format increments different distances for horizontal and vertical
motion. An incremental step in the horizontal direction, in fact,
is only half the distance covered by an incremental step in the
vertical direction. In the conventional format, vectors having
equal values causes motion at a 45-degree angle. But here,
45-degree motion is achieved only by having the I component
equal to twice the value of the J component.
     Actually, the creature doesn’t care a whit about the sense of
its vertical component of motion or the vertical stretching of its
geometry. You can distort the surface in any way your imagina¬
tion allows, and these little creatures would adapt to it with no
problem at all. Robot schemes built around position-sensing

44


===== PDF PAGE 047 =====

Fig. 3-3. Vector chart for creature motions.


                                               45


===== PDF PAGE 048 =====

formats would blow their minds with the simplest distortions of
their environment. In fact, the only reason to bring up the
subject of distorted fields is that the information is helpful later
on when it is time to do a statistical analysis of how the ALPHA
creature behaves.
     All of this merely justifies step 40 in the master program.
This line establishes a new position on the screen by taking the
old position and adding a signed integer to the X and Y values. It
is important to realize that the creature does not immediately go
to the new position determined by line 40, SET NEXT MOVE.
Rather, it is a suggested position that must be tested for
possible contact with an obstacle (namely the border figure)
before actually taking that next step.
     Here’s how the tricky little CON SENSE-1 subroutine
works. The SON(I) and SGNQ) functions in line 735 pick up the
direction of motion. Remember that the direction is determined
by the signs of the I and J values. The speed of motion is
determined by ABS(I) and ABSQ) functions in line 730. The
proposed values of X and Y appear in line 735, and you ought to
remember that they have already been tentatively established by
the SET NEXT MOVE operation in line 40 of the master
program.
     So CON SENSE has the creature sitting in a hypothetical
position on the screen, and it knows both the sense and speed of
both components of motion. The question is this: Has the
proposed new position for the creature carried it up to an
obstacle, carried it right into an obstacle, or carried it over an
obstacle? If any one of these conditions exist, CON SENSE-1
must respond with a signal indicating a contact situation. If none
of the three conditions is met, the proposed path for motion is
free of obstacles.
     CON SENSE-1 effectively scans the area in front of its
direction of motion, and the number of spaces it inspects de¬
pends on the rate of motion. The faster the creature is moving,
the farther out it must “look” for barriers. Line 730 sets up the
criteria for determining how far ahead the system searches. This
is why the absolute values of the motion codes are relevant in
that line, the larger these values become, the greater the size of
the area to be inspected.
     Line 735 then determines, among other things, the direc¬
tion of the area to be inspected. Of course, the most relevant
area to be checked is that directly ahead of the creature’s path of
motion, and this is why the signs of the I and J components are

46


===== PDF PAGE 049 =====

relevant in the line. Line 735 also incorporates a POINT function
which, in the Radio Shack BASIC, returns a -1 value if the
coordinates of the point indicate a lighted spot on the screen. If
the point is not lighted, the function returns a 0.
      In essence, CON SENSE-1 scans the area in front of the
path of the creature’s motion looking for lighted spots represent¬
ing parts of some kind of barrier. The scheme anticipates the
situation, always working one step ahead of where the creature
actually appears on the screen. When this contact-sensing
routine is used properly, the creature never quite touches or
jumps over any barrier in its path.
      In passing, you might note that the scheme only checks as
far ahead as necessary. It would be possible to simplify the
subroutine by having it scan the maximum amount of area each
time. The only problem with this idea is that the maximum area
involves looking ahead at 9 positions, as opposed to an average
of 6 actually required. The searching operation is a time consum¬
ing one that can slow down the action on the screen quite a
bit—a very noticeable amount. By searching ahead no more than
absolutely necessary, the whole ALPHA-I BASIC scheme runs
about y2 faster that it would otherwise.
      Calling subroutine 725 in line 50 of the master program
causes the system to search the path immediately ahead. If a
contact situation is impending, this subroutine returns with
CO=l. Otherwise it returns to line 60 with CO=0.
      If a contact is the next thing in order for the creature, line
65 of the master program causes the creature to blink on and off
in its new position. This is done simply to let the experimenter
know where the creature is residing on the screen.
      BLINK in line 65 is accomplished by simply doing a set of
two SET statements followed by a set of two corresponding
RESET statement. The line could be simplified by doing
SET(X,Y): RESET(X,Y), but the 2:1 distortion of the graphics
field would make the creature appear as a small rectangle, rather
than a neat little square. To make it appear as a neat little
square, one merely lights up both the X and X+1 must both be
RESET to erase the complete creature image.
      After doing BLINK, the main program calls for fetching a
new motion code, enter FETCH NEW-1. FETCH NEW-1 has
already been described in some detail. It is the subroutine that
selects pairs of random numbers between 1 and 5 and automati¬
cally excludes a 3, 3 combination. After seeing exactly how the

                                                                 47


===== PDF PAGE 050 =====

creature moves, you are now in a better position to appreciate
the purpose of FETCH NEW-1.
     In effect, FETCH NEW-1 selects new motion vectors, but
they come from this subroutine as RI and RJ, rather than I and J.
They emerge as integers between 1 and 5, rather than integers
between -2 and +2. However, examine the DECODE block,
represented by line 70 in the master program. It subtracts 3
from both RI and RJ. The numbers between 1 and 5 are thus
decoded into numbers between -2 and +2. The motion-stopping
combination of I=J=0 never comes about because the FETCH
RAND-1 is not allowed to return with RI=RJ=3.
     This is another one of those operations that might seem to
be needlessly complicated. Why not have FETCH NEW MOVE
generate numbers already in the range of -2 to 4-2 thereby
eliminating the need for a DECODE operation? It would be
easier to do it that way for most of the ALPHA-class projects in
this book. The higher-order machines, however, call for FETCH
NEW MOVE numbers that are larger than zero. FETCH NEW-1
is going to be used in most of the programs in this book, so
instead of writing different FETCH NEW MOVE subroutines
again and again, you can use this single one wherever the
operation is necessary.
     At any rate, you now have a valid set of motion codes. The
next question is whether or not the new set of codes will get the
creature away from the barrier. The question is quite easily
answered by applying the CONTACT subroutine a second time.
Will the newly fetched motion codes get the creature out of
trouble? If not, CO=l again and the BLINK, FETCH, and
DECODE sequence must be run all over again.
      The MOVE operation (line 80) is identical to BLINK. The
creature is in its new position by this time, however, and it is
running free of obstacles in its path.
      The overall impression created by this program and its
subroutines is a rectangle that serves as sort of a playpen for a
little square creature that moves around within its confines,
blinking along in a straight-line path until it encounters one of
the edges of the rectangle. It then blinks at that barrier until it
picks up a new motion code that allows it to move along or away
from that barrier.
     The action is fairly fast for the ALPHA-I BASIC program,
and for the uninitiated, it appears to be some sort of video game
that has a ball rebounding inside a rectangular field.

48


===== PDF PAGE 051 =====

LOADING AND TESTING THE PROGRAM
      Load the subroutines in the order they are presented in this
chapter. Where feasible, use the suggested test routines to
check them out before loading the next one. Until you’ve had a
chance to study the entire program in this book, it’s a good idea
to use the line numbers and subroutine names specified here. If
you find you are having any trouble running the programs, check
your program listing against the composite listing at the end of
this chapter.
      When everything is ready to go, the program is initiated by
entering RUN. The heading messages should appear first and
remain on the screen until you strike the ENTER key. After
that, sit back and watch the little creature go through its
Alpha-like behavior. The program will run indefinitely, until you
either do a BREAK, reset the system, or turn it off.
     Your appreciation for what is going on at this point is
directly proportional to your imagination and understanding of
how it all works. To be sure, there are far simpler programs for
getting a square to bounce around inside a rectangle figure on
the screen, but none of them contain the germ of machine
intelligence that this one does.
      Simply realizing that the basic amoeba dancing around in a
drop of water has a germ of life which separates it from inert
matter makes it something quite awsome in its own right. And in
spite of its innocuous appearance, the ALPHA-I BASIC creature
has the heart of a machine-creature of vast potential.

CDMPDSITE ALPHA-1 BASIC PRDGRAM
5 REM ** ALPHA-rf BASIC-1 MASTER

10 GOSUB500

15 CLS

20 60SUB550

30 C0SUB600

40 x=x+i:y=y+j

SO G0SUB72S

60 IFC0=0THEN80

65 SET( XfY ):SET< X+1»Y );RESET( XfY ):RESET< X+lfY);GOSUB650

70 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3;G0SUB725

75 IFC0*1THEN65

                                                               49


===== PDF PAGE 052 =====

80 SET( X f Y ): SET< X+1»Y ): RESEK X t Y ) :RESET< X+1 » Y )

85 GOT040

500 REM t* HEAOlNG-1 ««

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB<25)"R0DNEY ALPHA-i"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(25)-BASIC VERSION-

520 forl=otoio:print:next

525 INPUT"D0 ENTER TO START"JSiJRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553;F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383

555 F0RF=F1T0F2:P0KEF>131;NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4;P0KEF»1765NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64;P0KEFt191:next

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191;NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-1 **

610   x=io:Y=io:i=itj=i
620 RETURN
650 REM ** FETCH NEW-1 **

660 RI=RND(5)tR.J=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANriRJ=3THEN66<)

670 RETURN

725 REM        CON SENSE-1 **

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I):F0RYP=1T01+ABS< J)

735 IFP0INT(X+SGN(I )*XPrY+SGN(J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:next

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN




50


===== PDF PAGE 053 =====

                                                             4
               Alpha-i With Scoring

The ALPHA-I BASIC creature is certainly fun to watch espe¬
cially if you know what is going on behind the scenes. Now is
the time to introduce some science into the project, however.
ALPHA-I with a scoring feature is still a lot of fun, maybe even
more fun, but the idea is to be qualifying some of the creature
behavior, giving you something of a handle on how successful
the creature can be with operting in this ALPHA mode.
      Figure 4-1 shows the screen format generated by the pro¬
gramming in this chapter. The rectangular border and creature
figures are exactly the same as those used in ALPHA-I BASIC.
In fact they are generated by the same subroutines.
      In this case, however, note the scoring messages across the
top of the screen. NO. CONTRACTS specifies the total number
of times the creature encounters the barrier, including all the
times it makes moves that don’t work out. NO.GOOD MOVES
keeps track of the number of moves that actually get the
creature away from a contact situation. If you think about it for a
moment, you ought to realize that the number of good moves is
always less than or equal to the total number of contact situa¬
tions.
      SCORE is simply the ratio of number of good moves to the
total number of contacts. It is an up-to-the-moment score of the
creature’s performance. The higher the score, the better the
performance— the more successful the creature is at getting
away from the barrier.
SOME THOUGHTS ABOUT ALPHA-I SCORING
     Just how well can an ALPHA-I creature be expected to
score within its typical rectangle figure? Well, the creature is
selecting motion codes at random, and it is safe to assume the
chances of picking one certain motion code is just about as good
as selecting any other one.

                                                                 51


===== PDF PAGE 054 =====

     Figure 3-3 in the previous chapter shows all possible mo¬
tion vectors for the ALPHA-I creature. The creature program¬
med into the system in this chapter uses exactly the same set of
motion codes, so the chance of picking any one of the 24
different motion codes is 1:24.
     The creature is going to score much better than 1:24, or
.042, simply because there is more than one motion code that
can carry it away from any barrier situation. If, for instance, the
creature runs into a section of the barrier that is some significant
distance away from a comer, the chances of picking one of the
good moves is between .0500 and .583, depending depending on
the angle of contact.
     To see how this works for yourself, lay a sheet of paper
over the figure in Fig. 3-3, arranging it so the edge of the paper
cuts through the origin or center of the graph. The exposed
vectors represent the family of workable responses available to
the creature. Rotate the paper around the origin of the graph and
you will find between 12 and 14 possible motion codes depend¬
ing on the angle of the paper’s edge. (The edge of the paper, of
course, represents a barrier). When doing the counting in this
particular experiment, remember that the creature can slide
along the edge of a barrier.
     If the creature’s barrier didn’t have any comers, you would
expect the score to mn rather consistently between .5 and .58
over the long mn. But of course, any enclosing 2-dimensional
figure must have at least three places where the border changes
directions. (The simplest figure would be a triangle, whereas a
figure having an infinite number of places where the direction
changes would be a circle.) For our purposes here the figure is a
rectangle having four comers, and the question is this: What are
the chances of picking a good motion code when encountering a
comer?
     To answer this question, fold a sheet of paper into fourths
and cut out one of the 14th sections. The right angle cut out of
the paper represents a comer barrier. Place the paper over the
drawing in Fig. 3-3 and arrange it so the comer barrier is at the
origin of the graph. Rotate the paper through all the possible
contact angles and, in each case, count the number of possible
“escape” motion codes. In each case, you will find 4, 5, 6, or 8
workable motion code. This means the creature’s chances of
getting out of a corner trap is anywhere between 4:24 (.167) and
8:24 (.333).

52


===== PDF PAGE 055 =====

      It is possible to carry this sort of analysis to a rather
lengthy and, perhaps, boring extreme. The bottom line, how¬
ever, is that the ALPHA-I creature, working in the rectangular
area specified here, will certainly score something less than . 58,
but better than . 167. When you get the scoring program set up
and running, you will find the creature scoring somewhere
between .460 and .521 after a hundred contacts.
      If you are interested in pursuing this matter of ALPHA-I
scoring under different barrier conditions (varying the size of the
rectangle, changing to a triangular or circular field), and so on,
you will find some suggested experiments at the end of this
chapter. There is a lot of original thinking and experimentation
±at must be done in this particular area of adaptive machine
intelligence.

ALPHA-I SCORING FLOWCHART
     The flowchart for the ALPHA-I scoring program is shown in
Fig. 4-2. Note that its general flow of operations is almost
identical to the ALPHA-I BASIC flowchart in Fig. 3-2. And
what’s more, you can see that it uses many of the same
subroutines.




                  NO. CONTACTS     NO. GOOD MOVES     SCORE
                          88                  44       0.500




Fig. 4"1. Graphics format for ALPHA-I with scoring.

                                                                53


===== PDF PAGE 056 =====

     As far as the flowchart is concerned, the only differences
are the addition of the following operational blocks:

        C=C+1
        UPDATE SCORE
        D=D+1


C=C+lis a counting operation which keeps track of the total
number of times the creature has encountered a barrier situa¬
tion. Note that the C=C+1 block is situated so that it incre¬
ments one count whenever either of the two CONTACT condi¬
tionals show a contact situation, CO=l. So every contact,
whether from hitting a barrier while moving freely across the
screen or from making a bad selection of a new move, results in
a higher contact count. The D=D+1 block is responsible for
counting the number of good selections after running into a
barrier. Note that this block is situated at the point where the
creature notes no contact after selecting a new motion code.
     The output block, UPDATE SCORE, appears twice on the
flowchart. Its job is to print the messages along the top of the
screen and calculate the SCORE. The messages are updated
whenever there is any change in the scoring figures, after each
contact and after the creature makes a successful attempt to get
away from a contact situation.

ALPHA-i SCORING SUBROUTINES
      Some of the subroutine numbers specified on the flowchart
in Fig. 4-2 are marked with an asterisk. The asterisk indicates a
subroutine that is either an entirely new one or an old one that
has to be slightly modified for the occasion.
      Before looking at these new and revised subroutines, you
might want to note the subroutines that carry over unchanged
from the ALPHA-I BASIC program: S. 550 DRAW FIELD (the
field in this program is identical to the one used in Chapter 3), S.
725 CONTACT, and S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE. There will be
no need to enter these subroutines into the new program if you
have kept the ALPHA-I BASIC program on cassette tape.
      As for the new and modified subroutines: S. 500
HEADING/START performs exactly the same function in this
project as it did in the work in Chapter 3. It must be modified
slightly, however, to reflect the fact that the program is a
different one— specifically, an ALPHA-I scoring program. The
file name in this instance is HEADING-2. Compare the program

54


===== PDF PAGE 057 =====

   •REVISED OR NEW
   SUBROUTINE


Fig. 4-2. Flowchart for ALPHA-1 with scoring.

                                                55


===== PDF PAGE 058 =====

with HEADING-1 in Chapter 3, and you will be able to spot the
minor differences.
500 REM’*‘*HEADING-2**
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY ALPHA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB (20) “BASIC VERSION WITH SCORING”
520 FORL=0T010: PRINT: NEXT
525 INPUT “DO ENTER TO START”:S$: RETURN
         Variables introduced: L, S$
         Variables required at start: none
Test routine
1 CLS:GOSUB500
2CLS:PRINT“OK”
3 INPUTX$:GOT01
S.600 INITIALIZE isn’t much different from the ALPHA-I
BASIC version, either. All that neds to be done is add state¬
ments for initializing the C and D scoring counters. The new
line, line 615, sets these contact and good-move counters to
zero at the start of the program. The revised S.600 INITIALIZE
subroutine is labeled INITIAL-2.

600REM ♦♦INITIAL-2**
61OX=10:Y=10:I=1:J=
615C=0:F=0
620 RETURN

         Variables introduced: C,Y, I, J, C, D
         Variables required at start: none
     The only subroutine that is entirely new to this experiment
is S.800 UPDATE SCORE. For filing purposes, it is named UD
SCORE-1. Line 805 uses a field-specifier technique for printing
the score figures in a uniform fashion, and line 810 is responsi¬
ble for calculating the score, given the values of D (number of
good moves) and C (number of contacts.)
     The remaining lines in UD SCORE-1 merely merely print
the scoring titles and numbers as illustrated in Fig. 4-1.


800 REM ** UD SCORE-1 **
805 U$=“#.###”
810 E=D/C
850 PRINT015, “NO. CONTACTS”
852 PRINT(S35, “NO. GOOD MOVES”
853 PRINT@55, “SCORE”
855 PRINT(a)87, C:PRINT/108, D
860 PRINT(®119, USINGU$;E
865 RETURN

56


===== PDF PAGE 059 =====

         Variables introduced: U$
         Variables required at start: D,C

Test routine
1 CLS:INPUT“C, D”; C,D: GOSUB800
2 INPUTX$:G0T01


THE MASTER PROGRAM FOR ALPHA-I SCORING
     Just as the flowchart for ALPHA-I scoring is practically
identical to the chart for ALPHA-I BASIC, it follows that the
master programs are almost the same. The only differences of
significance are the statements in lines 63 and 78 which call for
incrementing the counters and updating the scoring display.
     Comparing the two master programs, you’ll find you can
create the new one by altering the REM statement in line 5 and
then adding lines 63 and 78.

5 REM ** ALPHA-I, BASIC-2 MASTER**
10 GOSUB500
15CLS
2OGOSUB550
3OGOSUB600
40 X=X-H;Y=Y-I-J
50GOSUB725
6OIFCO=0rHEN80
63C=C-Hi:GOSUB800
65 SET(X, Y): SET (X-fIC Y):RESET (X.Y): RESET (X-hlC Y):GOSUB650
70 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
75 IFCO = 1 THEN63
78 D=D-I-1 :GOSUB800
80 SET (X,Y):SET (X-Hl,Y):RESET (X,Y):RESET (X-l-l .Y)
85 GOTO40
LOADING THE ALPHA-I SCORING PROGRAM
     If the ALPHA-I BASIC programming is already resident in
your computer’s program memory, you should have no real
problem creating the scoring version from it. Just do this:
     1. Edit S.500 HEADING/START programming so ±at it
lines up with the HEADING-2 subroutine.
     2. Edit S. 600 INITIALIZE so that it has the initializing
steps for C and D as shown in INITIAL-2.
     3. Add S.800 as UD SCORE-1.
     4. Edit the master program by altering line 5 and adding
lines 63 and 78.
     Once you’ve had a chance to run this program and make
certain it is working as it should, save the program on cassette
tape. It will be used as the foundation for creating other pro-

                                                                57


===== PDF PAGE 060 =====

grams later on. If you have any difficulties with the operation of
the program, compare your listing with the composite program
at the end of this chapter.

SUGGESTED EXPERIMENTS FOR ALPHA-1 SCORING
      There are a number of relevant questions about the perfor¬
mance of simple ALPHA-I creatures that must be answered and
proven. For example, how is the scoring affected by changing
the size and aspect ratio of the rectangle? How would using a
triangular barrier effect the creature’s scoring? What is the
relationship between the creature’s size and the size of its
border figure, as reflected in the score?
      The scoring technique suggested in this chapter is far more
sensitive to changes when the total number of contacts is
relatively low than when the number of contacts is high. Is there
an alternate method for scoring the quality of the creature’s
choices so that the score is equally sensitive throughout the
experiment?
      Suppose you place a rectangular figure inside the main field
rectangle and make the creature sensitive to both figures. You
then rewrite the program so that no counting or scoring takes
place when the creature encounters the outer border, but the
counting and scoring do take place when the creature stumbles
into the inner rectangle. How will the scoring be different from
that described in this chapter?
      Try building a reasonable facsimile of a circle on the screen
and use it as the border figure. Is the scoring different from that
found for the usual rectangular border?

COMPOSITE PROGRAM FOR ALPHA-1 WITH SCORING
5 REM ** ALPHA-X» BASIC-2 MASTER **

10 GOSUB500

15 CLS

20 G0SUB550

30 GOSUB600

40 x=x+i:y=y+j

50 G0SUB725

60 IFC0=0THEN80

63 C=C+1:G0SUB800


58


===== PDF PAGE 061 =====

65 SET( XfY ):SET(X+lfY):RESET<XrY )JRESEKX+1»Y ):GOSUB650

70 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3;G0SUB725

75 IFC0=1THEN63

78 d=d+i:gosub8oo

80 SET( X»Y ):SET(X+lrY ):reset(x»y ):reset( X+1»Y)

85 GOT040

SOO REH »» HEADING-2 »«

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25)"RODNEY ALPHA-X"{PRINT

515 PRINTTAB(20 )"BASIC VERSION HITH SCORING"

520 FORL=0TO10{PRINT{NEXT

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"fS${RETURN

550 REM       FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553{F2=15615{F3=:16321{F4=16383

555 FQRF=FlT0F2{P0KEFfl31{NEXT

560 FQRF=F3T0F4{P0KEF»176{NEXT

565 F0RF=FlT0F4STEP64{P0KEFf191{NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64{POKEFr191{NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM 4# INITIAL-2 *4
610 x=io;y=io:i=i:j=i

615 c=o;d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM 44 FETCH NEW-1 4*

660 RI=RND<5 ):RJ=RND( 5 )

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN66()

670 RETURN

725 REM 44 CON SENSE-1 44

730 F-0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ){F0RYP=1T01+ABS< J )

735 IFPOINT( X-I-SGN( I )4XP»Y+SGN( J )4YP )=-lTHEN75()

740 NEXT{NEXT

745 C0=0{RETURN

                                                             59


===== PDF PAGE 062 =====

750 CO=11 RETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE-1 **

805 U$="

810 E=ri/C

850 PRINTei5»"N0* CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35f"NO. GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55f"SCORE"

855 PRINT(?37»C:PRINTei08»D

860 PRINTeil9»USINGU$»E

865 RETURN




60


===== PDF PAGE 063 =====

  Fun And Games With Alpha-1

                                                            L
The fun and excitement of working with adaptive intelligence is
not entirely limited to intellectual fun and excitement. It is quite
possible to play around with the little critters, putting them into
tricky situations they must cope with in their own unique
fashion. Once you have entered and tested the ALPHA-I with
scoring program, you are in a position to devise some games.
The two described in this chapter are ALPHA-I MAZE and
ALPHA-I PAINT INTO A CORNER.
     The primary purpose is to show that it is possible to play
with an ALPHA-I creature and derive some pleasure from
watching it at work. Even so, you will find some principles
introduced in this chapter that will have some special signifi¬
cance later on in the project.

ALPHA-I MAZE GAME
      Whenever two or more computer buffs get together and
begin discussing robots and artificial intelligence the subject of
maze-solving seems to crop up, sooner or later, anyway.
     The ALPHA-I creature isn’t very good at solving mazes if
you think in terms of a robot “learning” to solve a maze
perfectly. An ALPHA-I can work through a maze situation in its
own fashion, however. It’s possible to make a game out of the
problem by seeing how few contacts are required for doing the
job. ALPHA-I solves the maze purely by chance, and there is no
way to tell ahead of time how long the job will take. The
creature isn’t goal-oriented. So in effect, the critter is not trying
to solve the maze in the first place, but he gets there, and that’s
really what counts in the long run.
      ALPHA-I MAZE is built right into the ALPHA-I scoring
program you should have loaded and saved from Chapter 4. All
that’s needed to get started with MAZE is to modify S.500

                                                                  61


===== PDF PAGE 064 =====

HEADING a little bit, add a DRAW MAZE subroutine, and add a
few more lines to the master program.
      Figure 5-1 is the graphics for ALPHA-I MAZE. It looks
very much like the graphics for ALPHA-I with scoring, having
only some additional maze lines and a goal position designated
G. The ALPHA-I creature treats the five maze lines as though
they are border lines, rebounding from them in a random fash¬
ion.
      The creature begins the game in the upper left-hand comer
of the maze (as dictated by S.600 INITIALIZE) and gradually
works its way toward the goal. The scorekeeping features from
ALPHA-I with score keep track of the number of contacts,
number of good moves, and the creature’s running score.
      Upon reaching the goal position in the lower left-hand
comer of the screen, the game comes to a stop and the message
HIT !! appears in the message space in the upper left-hand
comer of the screen. The maze game can then be restarted by
simply striking the ENTER key.
      Two or more players can make a game of the ±ing by
taking turns restarting the maze problem. After each player has
a chance to watch his creature mn the maze, the player whose
creature has the fewest number of contacts wins. In the case of a
tie, the creature showing the better overall score is the winner.
      The flowchart for ALPHA-I MAZE is shown in Fig. 5-2. It
is a rather extensive flowchart, but assuming you’ve done your
homework on earlier flowcharts, there isn’t much to it. In fact,
the flowchart shown here is identical to the chart for ALPHA-I
with scoring (Fig. 4-2) with only a couple of exceptions. For
one, the MAZE flowchart must include a block that is responsi¬
ble for adding the maze lines to graphics format. This block
appears as S.580 DRAW MAZE in Fig. 5-2.
      Then too, there is a need for sensing when the creature
reaches the goal space and also to give the player a chance to
restart the game from scratch. All of this is handled by the
conditionals GOAL and AGAIN and the output block (}OAL
MESSAGE. DRAW MAZE, of course, is inserted into the
program very close to the beginning. In this instance it falls
between the usual S.500 DRAW FIELD and S.600 INITIALIZE
subroutines.
      The goal sensing and restarting operations are inserted in
the operational loop leading from MOVE to either SET NEXT
MOVE or DRAW FIELD. Whenever the creature is not in the

62


===== PDF PAGE 065 =====

                      NO CONTACTS    NO GOOD MOVES     SCORE
                                                47       0 47




Fig. 5-1. Graphics format for the ALPHA-i MAZE game.
goal area, the GOAL conditional responds with an N condition
which directs operations back to SET NEXT MOVE.
     If, on the other hand, the creature has just entered the goal
area, GOAL responds with a Y and the GOAL MESSAGE is
printed out on the screen. AGAIN brings all operations to a halt
until it is satisfied (Y condition) by striking the ENTER key.
Upon striking the ENTER key, the AGAIN conditional sends
operations back up to the point where the field and maze are
redrawn and the whole business is initialized again.

Subroutine Changes for ALPHA-I MAZE
     As far as the subroutines are concerned, you only have to
modify S.v500 HEADING to reflect the fact that this is a MAZE
game rather than the standard ALPHA/I with score. Here is the
revised version of this particular subroutine.

500 REM •* MAZE HEADING **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY ALPHA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB (25) “MAZE GAME”
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT ‘DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN
     The maze-drawing subroutine, S.580 DRAW MAZE, is an
entirely new one. It turns out to be a fairly simple one if you

                                                                63


===== PDF PAGE 066 =====

take advantage of the fact that S.550 DRAW FIELD sets the
values of the critical border measurements, the ones necessary
for fixing the size of the border and the position and size of the
maze lines.
      Here is the S.580 DRAW MAZE subroutine:

580 REM ** MAZE-1 **
585 FORN=0TO2
586 FORF=F1+129+N*256TOF2-I-120+N*256:POKEF,176:NEXT:NEXT
590 FORN=0TO1
591 FORF=F1 -l-265+N*256TOF2-l-255-l-N*256:POKEF,176:NEXT:NEXT
595 RETURN

                   Variables introduced:     N
              Variables required at start:   Fl, F2


1 CLS:GOSUB55O:GOSUB580
2 INPUTX$:G0T01

   The following subroutines carry over directly from the
ALPHA-I with score project without any alterations:

S. 550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-1)
S. 600 INITIALIZE (INITIAL-2)
S. 800 UPDATE SCORE (UD SCORE-1)
S. 650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)


Main Program for MAZE
      The main program for the MAZE game is a modified version
of the ALPHA-I with scoring program. Line 5 is edited to show
it is the ALPHA-I MAZE program, and line 25 is inserted to call
the DRAW MAZE subroutine. Everything else is the same down
to line 85. Instead of doing a GOTO40 as is done in Chapter 4, it
is replaced with a conditional logic statement representing the
GOAL conditional on the flowchart in Fig. 5-2. Line 90 is added
to do the GOAL MESSAGE and AGAIN operations.
      The ALPHA-I MAZE program is rather easily built around
the ALPHA-I with scoring program described in Chapter 4. If
you have saved that program on cassettte tape, all you have to
do now is load it into the computer and make the modifications
and additions outlined here.

5 REM ** ALPHA-I MAZE **
1OGOSUB500
15CLS

64


===== PDF PAGE 067 =====

Fig. 5-2. Flowchart for the MAZE game.


                                         65


===== PDF PAGE 068 =====

20 GOSUB550
25 GOSUB580
30 GOSUB600
35 POKE16261,71
40X=X+I:Y=Y+J
50 GOSUB725
60 IFCO=0THEN80
63C=C+1:GOSUB800
65 SET(X,Y):SET(X+1,Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X+1,Y):GOSUB650
70 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
75IFCO=1THEN63
78D=D-f1;GOSUB8O0
80 SET{X,Y):SET(X+(X+1,Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X+1,Y)
85 IFNOT(X<20ANDY>41)THEN4
90 PRINT 0,“GOAL !!”:INPUTX$;G0T015

The composite program listing for ALPHA-I MAZE appears at
the end of this chapter.

ALPHA-1 PAINT INTO A CORNER GAME
      Now here is a game that really puts ALPHA-I creature
abilities to the test. Personally, I have yet to tire of this little
game, and the people who see it in action get just about as
wound up in it as I do. The game is based on the old idea of
some thoughtless individual painting himself into the comer of a
room. The idea is to find some way to get out of the situation
without crossing any of the wet paint.
      The “wet paint” in this case is a white trail left behind by
the ALPHA creature as it moves around on the screen. Recall
that S.725 CONTACT works by scanning the path ahead of the
creature, looking for segments of light which represent an
obstacle. So far in this book, the contact-sensing feature has
been applied only to sensing the creature’s border figure. But
now, the contact subroutine will respond to the trail left behind
by the creature itself.
      As the ALPHA creature moves around the screen, it reacts
in a random fashion to both the border figure and the trail it
leaves behind. Inevitably the little fellow will “paint” himself
into a trap. He then searches around at random, looking for an
unlighted path which leads to freedom. This is where you find
yourself starting to cheer the creature along. Move this way or
that! No, don’t go that way—things will only get worse!
      The creature loses every time. Sooner or later he paints
himself into a tiny rectangle of darkness which has no escape.
The game then comes to an end, and a special statement
displays the total number of “brush strokes” it was able to make.

66


===== PDF PAGE 069 =====

To make a game of it, two more players can run a cycle of the
game. The player whose creature accumulated the largest
number of brush strokes wins the game.
Paint Into A Corner Flowchart and Subroutines
     The flowchart for this PAINT game is quite similar to that
of the ALPHA-I with scoring program in Chapter 4. All you will
have to do is modify S.500 HEADING a little bit and add a few
more statements to the master program.
     Since it is assumed you have been studying the flowcharts
thoroughly as you go along, it is now necessary to make a few
comments about the additional blocks appearing in Fig. 5-3. The
BS variable appearing in a couple of places on this flowchart is
the brush-stroke counter. It is set to zero at the beginning of a
game cycle, directly after the usual S.600 INITIALIZE sub¬
routine. It is then incremented by one every time the creature
makes a successful move. See the BS=BS+1 block following the
MOVE step. The brush stroke score is not printed out, how¬
ever, until the end of the game. See the PRINT DONE, BS
output block on the flowchart.
     Another new variable, CC, is introduced in this game. The
purpose of CC is to count the number of successive moves that
don't work. It is the criteria for ending the game. CC is set to
zero whenever the system first senses contact with either the
border figure or the creature's trail. CC is then incremented by
CC=CC+1 as long as the creature is stuck in a trap and trying to
bang its way out. Each unsuccessful attempt causes CC to grow
larger. If the creature happens to find its way out of the situation
before CC reaches 50, the subsequent contact resets CC to zero,
and the creature has 50 more chances in succession to get away.
The conditional statement, CC =50, is satisfied when the crea¬
ture is finally down for the count. The program then prints the
message DONE IN BS STROKES, where BS is the number of
accumulated brush strokes.
     The game comes to a halt at the AGAIN conditional and
remains stopped until the player strikes the ENTER key. Hitting
the ENTER key at this point in the operation satisfies the
AGAIN conditional, and the program is restarted at S.550
DRAW FIELD.
     PAINT INTO A CORNER does not call for any new sub¬
routines. All the extra operations are covered in the main
program. Only the S.500 HEADING routine has to be modified
to show that it is the PAINT game.

                                                                 67


===== PDF PAGE 070 =====

     So load ALPHA-I with scoring from your cassette machine,
and fix up S. 500 to look like this:

500 REM ** HEADING ALPHA PAINT **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB(25)“RODNEY ALPHA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB(23)“PAINT INTO A CORNER”
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN
Main Program for PAINT
     The main program in this case is a slight variation of the
main program for ALPHA-I with scoring. You can build around
that earlier program and get tlie PAINT game going in short
order.
5 REM    ALPHA-I PAINT **
1OGOSUB500
15 CLS
20 GOSUB550
30 GOSUB600
35 BS=0
40 X=X-f-l:Y=Y+J
50 GOSUB725
60 IFCO=0THEN80
62 CC=0
63C=C+1 :GOSUB800
65 SET(X,Y):SET(X+1,Y):GOSUB650
70 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
75IFCO=1GOTO90
78 D=D-I-1 :GOSUB800
80 SET(X,Y):SET(X+1.Y)
85 BS=BS-H1 :GOTO40
90 CC=CC+1
95 IFCC>=50 THEN100 ELSE63
100 PRINT@0,“DONEIN”:PRINT(®64,BS-50‘STROKES”
110INPUTX$;:GOTO15

     Line 35 is inserted to initialize the BS counter, and line 62
is added to set the CC counter to zero. The BS counter is then
incremented by editing line 85 to include BS=BSH“1. Line 90is
added to increment the CC counter. Line 95 establishes the
criteria for ending the game (50 bad moves in succession), with
line 100 responsible for printing out the brush stroke score.
Adding line 110 completes the operations by doing the AGAIN
conditional operation. The composite program for this PAINT
game appears at the end of this chapter.
THE ROBOT LAWNMOWER
    This isn’t really a game. Rather it is a demonstration of how
an Alpha-Class machine can eventually cover all the space within

68


===== PDF PAGE 071 =====

Fig. 5-3. Flowchart for PAINT INTO A CORNER.


                                               69


===== PDF PAGE 072 =====

a closed figure, even though its motion is essentially random in
nature. The situation actually has more sophisticated implica¬
tions, but it’s more fun to work in the context of something like a
lawn-mowing machine.
     Incidentally, it is difficult to describe this particular de¬
monstration without pointing out that some highly touted com¬
mercial machines claimed to be lawn-mowing “robots” are really
no more sophisticated than our basic ALPHA-I creature — the
simplest possible creature on the scale of evolutionary machine
intelligence.
      What might appear to be a significant achievement as far as
the popular media is concerned turns out to be the starting point
for what you’re doing here. Does that help you see the power of
the tool you are playing with?
     At any rate, the “lawnmowing” version of ALPHA-I can be
rather easily built around ALPHA-I with scoring. Assuming you
have saved that program from Chapter 4 on cassette tape, you
merely have to load it into the computer and make a few minor
changes.
     The changes suggested here accomplish one task: They
allow the ALPHA-I creature to leave behind a white trail that
does not stimulate contact-like behavior. The critter, in other
words, can run through its own trail without regarding it as an
obstacle. This, of course, is a turnabout from the PAINT game
(where the creature did regard its own trails as obstacles to be
reckoned with).
      All you have to do is write one new subroutine and modify
the ALPHA-I with scoring master program a little bit. Here’s the
new subroutine:

700 REM     BORD POS SENSE-1 **
705 IF{X-t-l)>1240R(X-hl)<40R(Y-l-J)>450R(Y-t-J)- 10THEN715
710CO=0;RETURN
715CO=1:RETURN

This subroutine replaces the 725 CONTACT subroutine you
have been using all along. This contact subroutine senses the
position of the border figure and causes the creature to react as
though it actually made contact with that figure. It is not a
light-sensing contact mechanism, so it is totally insensitive to
the creature’s own tracks on the screen.
     An astute reader will recognize that this contact-sensing
scheme violates the principle of relative positioning that is so
crucial to the success of adaptive perception. It’s a small price to

70


===== PDF PAGE 073 =====

pay for a fun demonstration, however. An ALPHA-II machine
described in a later chapter will do the same job within the
proper context of adaptive perception. At that time there will be
no need for adjusting the creature’s behavior on the basis of its
position relative to the geometry of its environment.
      So enter S. 700 CONTACT and then go through your master
program for ALPHA-I with scoring, replacing all GOSUB725
statements with GOSUB700. Next, go through the master pro¬
gram, eliminating all statement sequences RESET(X,Y):RE-
SET(X+1,Y). These are the statements used for erasing the
trail as the creature moves along. You want the trails to remain
so that you can clearly see how much territory the critter has
covered at any given moment. Rename the master program
something like LAWNMOWER and put it to work.
      It’s going to take a long time for the creature to cover all
the space. For a long time, there are going to be some black
spaces where the “lawnmower” hasn’t gone. But rest assured,
the ALPHA-I creature will cut all the grass. It might take a day
or two, but the job will get done eventually.
      Maybe you don’t want to tie up the computer that long.
That’s all right. Just run the program long enough to get the idea
of the thing.

COMPOSITE PROGRAMS
5 REM ** ALPHA-I MAZE      *$

10 GOSUB500

15 CLS

20 GOSUB550

25 GOSUB580

30 G0SUB600

35 P0KE16261»71

40 x=x+i:y=y+j

50 G0SUB725

60 IFCO=0THEN80

63 C=C+1:GOSUB800

65 SET< XfY );SET< X+1»Y ):RESET< XfY ){RESET< X+IfY )JCOSUB650

70 I=RI-3:J*RJ-3:G0SUB725

75 IPC0=1THEN63

                                                               71


===== PDF PAGE 074 =====

78 D»D-M:GOSUB800

80 SET( X»Y ):SET(X+1»Y);RESET< XrY ):RESET( X+lfY )

85 IFN0T< X<20ANDY>41)THEN40

90 PRINieOf-GOAL M'* t INPUTX$:C0T015

500 REM       MAZE HEADING tt

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB<25)“RODNEY ALPHA-i"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(25)“MAZE GAME"

520 forl=otoio:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START”rSitRETURN

550 REM       FIELD-1

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321;F4s16383

555 F0RF=F1T0F2:P0KEFt131;NEXT

560 F0RF=:F3T0F4:P0KEF» 176: NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEFt191:NEXT


570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:P0KEF»191INEXT

575 RETURN

580 REM ** MAZE-1 **

585 FORN=OT02

586 F0RF=Fl+129+N*256T0F2+120+Ni|c256:POKEFf 176:NEXT:NEXT

590 FORN=OOT01

591 F0RF=Fl+265+N*256T0F2+255+N*256;P0KEFrl76:NEXT:NEXT

595 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL-2

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1

660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN


72


===== PDF PAGE 075 =====

725 REM ♦* CON SENSE-1 »*

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I):FQRYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINK X+SGN<I )»XP»Y+SGN( J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:NEXT

745 co=o:return

750 co=i:return

800 REM       UD SCORE-1 **

805 U$="

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTei5»"N0» CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35»"N0» GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"

855 PRINTe87»C:PRINTei08»D

860 PRINTeil9fUSINGU$?E
865 RETURN


PAINT INTO A CORNER Program
5 Rth *4 ALPHA-1 PAINT 4*

10 GOSUB500

15 CLS

20 GOSUB550

30 G0SUB600

35 BS=0

40 x=x+i:y=y+j

50 G0SUB725

60 IFC0=0THEN80

62 CC=0

63 c=c+i;gosub8oo

65 SET( X»Y ):SET(X+1»Y ):G0SUB650

70 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

75 IFC0=1G0T090

78 D=D+1:GOSUB800

                                                     73


===== PDF PAGE 076 =====

80 SET(XfY ):SET<X+1»Y)

85 BS=BS+1:GOT040

90 CC=CC+1

95 IFCC>=50THEN100ELSE63

100 PRINTeO»"DONE IN":PRINTe64»BS-50"STROKES"

110 iNPUTXSf:gotoio

500 REM ** HEADING ALPHA PAINT **

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25)"R0DNEY ALPHA-i"JPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(23)"PAINT INTO A CORNER"

520 forl=otoi<);print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"JS$:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383


555 F0RF=F1T0F2:F0KEF»131INEXT

560 FORF-F3TOF4JPOKEFf176;NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEFr191:NEXT

570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:POKEF»191;next

575 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL-2 **

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:.j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1 **

660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINT( X+SGN( I )*XPrY+SGN( J mp )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTJNEXT


74


===== PDF PAGE 077 =====

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REH ** UD SCORE-1 **

805 U$="#»***"

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTei5»"N0. CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35r"N0» GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55f"SCORE"

855 PRINTe87»C:PRINTei08»D

860 PRINTeil9rUSINGU$»E

865 RETURN




                                75


===== PDF PAGE 078 =====

     6        Compiling Data

 < >          For Alpha-I Behavior

While it is fun to make up games for ALPHA-I, modify the pro¬
grams to get it doing different tricks, and just watch it play
around on the screen, don’t lose sight of the fact that you’re
dealing with a system of some scientific and technological value.
The science of the matter demands some unbiased figures
regarding the behavior of your ALPHA-I creature. It is time to
gather some data which you can use as a standard for comparing
this creature’s performance with that of more sophisticated
versions you will be creating later on. This standard of compari¬
son is absolutely essential if you hope to prove to yourself, and
others, that something truly meaningful is taking place in front of
you.
     The measuring stick — the standard for comparison — used
for demonstrating machine intelligence in this project is a simple
sort of learning curve. It is a curve compiled from a large
number of separate experiments, and it clearly reflects the
creature’s ability to adapt to its surroundings.

THE LEARNING CURVE FOR ADAPTIVE MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
     Figure 6-1 is the learning curve for the basic ALPHA-I
creature. In this particular case, the curve is the result of
running 100 different ALPHA-! creatures through a cycle of 100
contacts each. Using the ALPHA-I program suggested in this
chapter and running a hundred different creatures, your own
curve should not be a significantly different from this one.
     It is important to compile the scores for ALPHA creatures
in a statistical fashion because no two creatures undergo exactly
the same scoring pattern. You have probably noticed, for in¬
stance, that some ALPHA-I creatures seem to score exceedingly
well at first, running perfect scores of 1.000 through the first
four or five encounters with the border figure. Others, however.

76


===== PDF PAGE 079 =====

run into a comer within the first few moves and show exception¬
ally poor scores from the start. Hence, the need for a statistical
compilation of results for a relatively large number of ALPHA
creatures.
      The idea is to create a statistically “average” ALPHA
creature, one whose scoring pattern clearly reflects the random
nature of ALPHA behavior. While the scoring pattern for an
individual ALPHA creature might bounce around quite a bit
during its lifetime, the “averaged” creature ought to show a
fairly smooth curve such as the one in Fig. 6-1.
      The general procedure for compiling the learning curve is to
first run an ALPHA creature, keeping track of the total number
of contacts (C) and good moves (D) at intervals of ten contacts.
After running the creature through a series of 100 contacts and
recording the data, the little fellow is wiped out and the whole
procedure is started again.
      The C and D scores, at intervals of 10 contacts, are then
added to the same scores compiled through all previous trials.
The result, after mnning maybe 100 different creatures, is a set
of ten accumulated values for C and D. These numbers will be
rather large because they represent the accumulated results of
running 100 creatures.
      The ten sets of C and D values are then used for computing
the average score at each of the 10-step intervals. The result is

   1.0‘
   0.9-

   0.8-

to 0-7-
S 0.6-
O         A .

O 0 5-           •      --—_ •              •      •-•-•-•
Q
lu 0.4-
-j
I 0.3-
O
^ 0.2-
   0.1-
                   TOTAL NUMBER OF CONTACTS (C)
                 1    1    1    1    1    1      1               1  *
      0   10    20   30   40   50   60   70     80              90 100


Fig. 6-1. A compiled learning curve for the basic ALPHA-I creature.

                                                                      77


===== PDF PAGE 080 =====

an average score for a large number of creatures after 10, 20,
30, ..., 100 contacts. Plotting this data on a graph results in a
curve similar to that in Fig. 6-1.
     Now it might sound like a lot of work to sit around watching
the scores and writing down the results at 10-contact intervals
for a hundred or more ALPHA-I creatures; it would be a lot of
work to do the job by hand. Fortunately, you have a nice
computing machine fully capable of doing all the tedious work for
you. In fact, the compiling program suggested in this chapter
makes the process fully automatic. All you do is enter the
number of creatures to participate in the project, strike the
ENTER key, and then go fishing or something like that for the
rest of the day.
     When the data-gathering part of the job is done, the system
clears the screen and prints out the data necessary for drawing
the learning curve. The program can be extended to draw the
learning curve, itself. That job is left to you, however.

ALPHA-1 COMPILE SCREEN FORMATS
      The program for compiling the ALPHA-I learning curve
involves three different screen formats: the heading, the crea¬
ture and its environment, and the tabulated results. The heading
format isn’t much different from headings used in all the previous
programs, so there is no need to dwell on that part of the job at
this time. Figure 6-2 shows the two remaining screen formats.
      Figure 6-2A is the image you see on the screen while the
experiment is actually running. It is basically the same format
used for the ALPHA-I with scoring project in Chapter 4. The
only difference is the additional parameter, CREATURE NO. In
this particular example, the experimenter has chosen to run just
10 creatures, and it so happens the 3rd one is on the screen at
the moment.
      Figure 6-2B shows the screen format after the experiment
is done. In this case, the data represents the compiled results of
running 10 cycles or creatures in succession. The numbers show
the average scores after 10, 20, 30, ..., 100 contacts. This is the
data that makes up the learning curve for the experiment.


FLOWCHART FOR ALPHA-I COMPILE
    The flowchart for this project is shown in Fig. 6-3. The
general flow of operations is quite similar to that of ALPHA-I

78


===== PDF PAGE 081 =====

   CREATURE NO. NO. CONTACTS NO. GOOD MOVES SCORE
       3 OF 10           87          38     0-437




                                 (A)
  COMPILED RESULTS FOR 10 CYCLES               60 =0.483
    ifi =0:440                                 70 =0.480
    20 =0.455                                  80 =0.488
    30 =0.473                                  90 =0.482
    40 =0 483                    /D\          100 =0.482
                                              DONE'7-


Fig. 6-2. Screen formats for ALPHA-1 COMPILE. (A) Creature presenta¬
tion. (B) Compiled data.
with score (Fig. 4-2). That should come as no big surprise,
considering this project is built upon the scoring program in
Chapter 4. The only points of difference, as far as operations are
concerned, are the addition of an S.900 COMPILE RUN, a RUN
DONE conditional operation, a SERIES DONE conditional, a
COMPILE SERIES display operation, and an AGAIN condi¬
tional.
     S.900 COMPILE RUN is the operation responsible for
dividing each creature’s experience into sets of 10 contacts and
accumulating the results in memory. RUN DONE signals
whether or not a given creature has completed its 100-contact
life cycle. If the number of contacts is less than 100, this
conditional operation lets the creature continue its playing
around on the screen. Otherwise, control is shifted over the
SERIES DONE conditional.
     SERIES DONE senses whether or not the experiment has
run the designated number of creatures. If, for example, the
experimenter designates a series of 100 creatures, this condi-

                                                                  79


===== PDF PAGE 082 =====

tional is not satisfied until the 100th creature lives out its
100-contact cycle.
     Suppose a creature has completed its run, as determined by
RUN DONE, but it is not the final creature to be run in the
experiment. SERIES DONE thus generates an N result, and the
program sets up a whole new creature format by going back up
to the DRAW FIELD and INITIALIZE RUN operations.
     When the final creature completes its 100-contact life, the
SERIES DONE conditional is satisfied and control goes to the
COMPILE SERIES operation. This operation is the one that
does the mathematical work and formatting necessary for
generating the scores. After printing out the compiled results of
the entire experiment, control goes to the AGAIN conditional.
This gives the experimenter a chance to start a whole new
experiment by striking the ENTER key. The most important
effect of this operation, however, is to hold the compiled results
on the screen for an indefinitely long period of time — until you
get back from that fishing trip, for instance.

SUBROUTINES FOR ALPHA-1 COMPILE
     As mentioned earlier, ALPHA-I COMPILE is built around
the ALPHA-I with scoring programs described in Chapter 4, So
if you have saved that program and its subroutines on cassette
tape, you won’t have much trouble putting together ALPHA-I
COMPILE. The subroutines that carry over from ALPHA-I with
scoring are:

       S.50 DRAW FIELD {FIELD-1)
       S.600 INITIALIZE RUN (INITIAL-2)
       S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
       S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)

Subroutines carrying over with slight modifications are:

       S.500 HEADING
       S.800 UPDATE SCORE

The only new subroutines are:

       S.625 INITIALIZE SERIES
       S.900 COMPILE RUN
       S.875 COMPILE SERIES
Modifications for S.500 HEADING
     The only operational difference is the addition of an INPUT
statement in line 515. This is where the experimenter enters the

80


===== PDF PAGE 083 =====

Fig. 6-3. Flowchart for ALPHA-1 COMPILE.

                                           81


===== PDF PAGE 084 =====

number of creatures to be studied, variable T.

500 REM ** COMP HEAD-1 **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25)“RODNEY ALPHA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB (15)“BASIC VERSION WITH SCORE COMPILING”
517 PRINT:INPUT‘‘HOW MANY TEST CYCLES”:T
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT‘‘DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN

         Variables introduced: T, L, S$
         Variables required at start: none
Test routine
1 CLS;GOSUB500
2CLS:PRINTT,‘‘OK”
3 INPUTX$;GOT01


Modification for S.800 UPDATE SCORE
     This subroutine has to be modified to display the creature
number—see lines 845 and 857. Variable TN in line 857 is a
tally of the number of creatures that have been run in the
experiment, and variable T is the total number of creatures that
have to be run in order to complete the experiment. You should
recall that the value of T is established by the experimenter as
part of the revised HEADING subroutine.

800 REM    UD SCORE COMP-1 **
805
810 E=D/C
845 PRINT® 0,“CREATURE NO.”
850 PRINT® 15,“NO. CONTACTS”
852 PRINT® 35,“NO. GOOD MOVES
853 PRINT® 55,“SCORE”
855 PRINT® 87,C:PRINT®108,D
857 PRINT ®64,TN“ OF’T
860 PRINT ® 119,USINGU$:E
865 RETURN

         Variables introduced: U$, E
         Variables required at start: D, C, TN, T

Test routine
1 CLS:C=1:GOSUB800
2 INPUTX$;GOT01

S.625 INITIALIZE SERIES Subroutine
     This is a new subroutine which must be entered from
scratch. Its only purpose is to initialize a portion of computer

82


===== PDF PAGE 085 =====

memory devoted to accumulating the statistical data for the
experiment. As shown later in this chapter, the data-
accumulating operation is carried out by means of a 10 x 2
array. This subroutine is responsible for initializing all parts of
the array to zero.
625 REM •* INITIAL COMP-1 **
630 FORN=1TO10:FORM=1TO2:T(N,M)=0:NEXT:NEXT
635 RETURN

         Variables introduced: M,N
         Variables required at start: none

S.900 COMPILE RUN Subroutine
      This new subroutine appears rather simple at first glance,
but it does a big job as far as the compiling operations are
concerned. Line 905 is responsible for determining whether or
not it is time to do any compiling. Specifically, it looks for
contacts 10, 20, 30, ..., 100. This is done by comparing C/10
with the integer value of C/10. If C is not a multiple of 10, the
result of dividing C by 10 will be some number containing
significant decimal values. If C is equal to 45, for example, C/10
is 4.5 — the result carries a significant decimal value of 5.
However, the integer value of C/10 is simply 4. And since the
two numbers aren’t equal, line 905 in this subroutine calls for
returning to the main program without doing anything else to the
data.
      If, on the other hand, C is a multiple of 10, the process of
dividing C by 10 yields an integer value that equals INT(C/10).
Say, for example, C is equal to 50. Dividing that number by 10
gives us a 5 — an integer equal to INT(50/10) or INT(5).
      Whenever C is a multiple of 10, program control goes to
line 910 where the current values of C and D are accumulated in
the program’s 10 x 2 array. In this line, TF is defined as the
integer value of C/10. The value of the first element in array
T(TF,1) is then increased by C, after which the current value of
D is added to its old value in array T(TF,2).
      What develops is a list of ten items (TF=1 through 10),
each having two elements. The first element in each case is the
accumulated value of C (TF,1), and the second element in each
case is the accumulated value of D (TF,2).
      After accumulating the values of C and D in line 910, the
system returns to the main program without making any further
changes in the status of the experiment, assuming TF is less

                                                                83


===== PDF PAGE 086 =====

than 10. If TF is less than 10, the creature on the screen has not
yet completed its 100-contract cycle.
     If, on the other hand, TF is equal or greater than 10, the
creature has completed its useful life, and it is time to start with
another creature. Line 920 increments the creature number (TN)
before returning operations to the main program.
     In summary, 900 COMPILE RUN does three things:

1. It determines whether or not it is time to accumulate the
current values of C and D.
2. Accumulates the values of C and D in a 10 x 2 array
whenever it is time to do so.
3. And increments the creature count (TN) whenever one com¬
pletes its 100-contact life cycle.

900 REM *♦ COMPILE-1 **
905IFC/10<> INT{C/10)RETURN
91OTF=1NT(C/10):T(TF,1)=T(TF,1)=T(TF,1)-I-C:T(TF,2)=T(TF,2)-I-D
915IFTF<10RETURN
920TN=TN-h1:RETURN

          Variables introduced: TF
          Variables required at start: C, D, TN

S.875 Compile Series
     This subroutine prints out the results of the experiment,
formatting it as shown in Fig. 6-2B. It first prints the heading
message, including the number of creatures or cycles that were
run. Line 885 then reads the array of accumulated data, printing
the contact decades, followed by an equal sign, and the results of
dividing the accumulated D values by the accumulated C values.
The result is a set of 10 scores which represent the average
scores for TN creatures in steps of ten contacts. The final line in
this subroutine does the AGAIN conditional operation shown on
the flowchart in Fig. 6-3.

875 REM ** PRINT COMP-1
880 CLS:PRINT“COMPILED RESULTS FOR’TN-1“CYCLES”:PRINT:PRINT
885 FORN=1TO10:FC=T(N,1):FD=T(N,2)
890 PRINTN-^I 0“=”;:PRINTUSINGU$:FD/FC:NEXT
895 PRINT:PRINT:INPUT“DONE”;X$:RETURN


         Variables introduced: N, FC, FD, X$
         Variable required at start: T(N,1), T(N,2), U$, TN

84


===== PDF PAGE 087 =====

THE MASTER PROGRAM FOR ALPHA-1 COMPILE
     The master program for ALPHA-I COMPILE is a slightly
revised version of the ALPHA-I with scoring master program in
Chapter 4. So, again, if you have saved the ALPHA-I scoring
program on cassette tape, you can fix up this new compile
version from it.

5 REM ** ALPHA-I COMPILE MASTER **
7DIMT(10,2)
8TN=1
10 GOSUB500
15CLS
17GOSUB625
2OGOSUB550
3OGOSUB600
40X=X+I:Y=Y-I-J
50GOSUB725
60 IFCO=OTHEN80
63 C=C+1:GOSUB900
64 IFC>=100THEN90ELSEGOSUB800
65 SET(X,Y):SET{X+1 ,Y):):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X-I-1 ,Y):GOSUB650
70 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3GOSUB725
75IFCO=1THEN63
78D=D-h1 :GOSUB800
80 SET(X,Y):SET(X+1,Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X+1,Y)
85 GOTO40
9OlFTN<=TTHEN20
95 GOSUB875
100 GOT08

      Of course, line 5 has to be edited to reflect the fact ±at this
program is different from the master in Chapter 4. Line 7 then
follows the flowchart in Fig. 6-3 by setting the dimensions of the
10 X 2 array. (This is the array that serves as an accumulator for
 C and D values throughout the entire experiment). Line 8 then
initializes the creature number, TN, to 1. Lines 10 and 15 are
the same as before, but line 17 has to be inserted in order to
initialize the values of all elements in the accumulator array to
zero.
      There are no changes in the master program until it is time
to insert line 63. This line calls S.900 COMPILE RUN. Line 64
is then inserted to test the experiment for contact values of 100
— RUN DONE conditional operation.
      Lines 90, 95, and 100 are added to the master program from
Chapter 4. Line 90 takes care of the SERIES DONE conditional
operation, while line 85 calls the S. 875 COMPILE SERIES
routine and the AGAIN conditional step. If you wish to start
another set of experiments, line 100 returns program operations

                                                                  85


===== PDF PAGE 088 =====

back to line 8. Everything else in this master program follows
the ALPHA-I with scoring program exactly. Even the line
numbers are the same.
LOADING ALPHA-1 WITH COMPILE
     Load the entire ALPHA-I with scoring program into your
system and then modify S.500, S.800, and the master program
as described in the two previous sections of this chapter. Add
subroutines S.625, S.900, and S.875.
     The program is now ready to run. Take a shot at it by
entering just one creature cycle the first time. Watch the
ALPHA creature work its way through a hundred contact situa¬
tions. The process might take about 10 minutes, but at the end
of that time, the system should display a complete rundown of
the scoring at 10-contact intervals. If you find any problems with
the operation of the program, check your listing against the
composite listing at the end of this chapter.

SOME NOTES ON RUNNING ALPHA-I COMPILE
      Bear in mind that ALPHA-I COMPILE is a genuine scien¬
tific experiment, and its main purpose is to generate a learning
curve which represents the learning ability of your ALPHA-I
creature. It can be used as a standard for comparing the behavior
of other creatures for a long time to come.

 Number of Creatures to Test
     The larger the number of creatures you test, the smoother
and more reliable your results will be. If you run only 10
creatures, for example, it only takes one or two unusually good
(or bad) ones to throw all the data out of kilter.
     A reasonable minimum number of creatures is on the order
of 100. Using that many creatures, the results of exceptionally
high-scoring runs will be pretty much balanced out by an equal
number of unusually low-scoring creatures.
     In statiticians terms, you want a sampling population that is
as large as possible. There are some practical limitations to how
large the sampling population can be, and the most significant
one is the amount of time required to run the experiment. On
the average, it takes about 10 minutes to run one ALPHA-I
creature through its 100-contact lifetime. Some take less time
and others take more, but you can figure the total experimenta¬
tion time using 10 minutes per critter as a ballpark figure.

86


===== PDF PAGE 089 =====

     So how long does it take to run this experiment for 100
creatures? At 10 minutes apiece, it figures out to something on
the order of 1000 minutes, or about 16 hours! As suggested
earlier in this chapter, you should start the experiment, spend
the rest of the day fishing, and then get a good night’s sleep.
Then maybe the experiment will be over.
     It’s a good idea to hold off the experiment until you have a
block of time available for running the machine. Interrupting the
program to do some other sort of work on the machine wipes out
the project, making it necessary to start over some other time.
     In spite of the amount of computer time that’s tied up with
this experiment, you must do it for yourself sooner or later.
Don’t take my word that your creatures will behave exactly as
shown in Fig. 6-1. That’s not very scientific.
     Any experiment worth its salt is reproducable by anyone
who follows the instructions. Get into the habit of doublecheck¬
ing and duplicating all the experiments described in this book.
Later on, you are going to be seeing some rather incredible
suggestions about the power of self-programming, adaptive
machines, and you will be in a position to substantiate the claims
only if you have proven every step for yourself.

Accounting for a Statistical Glitch
      Notice in Fig. 6-1 that the ALPHA-I creatures tend to score
somewhat better through the first 30 contacts than they do later
on in the runs. You will also find this slight drop in performance
in your own data. Does ±is mean the creatures really do better
at the start? Does it mean they are smarter at first? No, not at
all.
      The slight, initial drop in the learning curve is an anomaly
created by the way the creatures are initialized by the S.600
INITIALIZE subroutine. The creatures always begin by moving
downward and slightly to the right of the border figure. As a
result of this initial motion, the creature’s first contact with the
border never involves a score-dropping comer contact. The
chances of making a successful move after the initial contact is
14:24, and the implication is that the creature will usually score
better than at any later time in the experiment. The situation
tends to “bias” the data in the early going.
      One way to eliminate the problem is to restructure the
initialization subroutine so that the creature has just as good a
chance of making a comer contact as one with a section of border

                                                                 87


===== PDF PAGE 090 =====

that is far removed from a comer. Here's something along this
line that is worth trying:

600 REM ** INITIAL COMP-3 **
605 GOSUB650
610 X =RI-h25:Y=RJ-h25;GOSUB650
612l=RI-3:J=RJ-3
615C=0:D=0
620 RETURN

      Here, the initial position and direction of motion for the
creature are both determined at random. It is a matter of calling
S.650 FETCH NEW-1 for an entirely different purpose. After
doing S.650 in line 605, the values of RI and RJ are summed with
a constant value of 10 to establish the initial position of the
creature. The second part of line 610 calls the S.650 FETCH
NEW-1 subroutine again, but this time the values of RI and RJ
are used for setting the initial direction of motion.
      Run ALPHA-I COMPILE with this revised initialization
subroutine and see if the learning curve is almost perfectly
straight all the way across. If that’s the case, we have success¬
fully accounted for the slight anomaly in the curve of Fig. 6-1.

COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTING FOR ALPHA-1 COMPILE
5 RLM     ALPHA-I COMPILE MASTER **

7 DIMT(10r2)

a TN=-1

10 GOSUB500

15 CLS

17 G0SUB625

20 GOSUB550

30 G0SUB6()0

40 x=x+i:y=y+j

50 G0SUB725

60 IFCO=0THEN80

63 C=C+1:GOSUB900

64 IFC> = l()0THEN90ELSEGOSUB800

65 SET< X»Y ):SET(X+1»Y):RESET< X»Y ):RESET( X+lfY ):GQSUB650

70 I=RI-3:.J=RJ-3:G0SUB725


88


===== PDF PAGE 091 =====

75 IFC0=1THEN63

78 d=d+i:gosub8oo

80 3ET( XfY ):SET( X+1rY):RESET( X»Y ):RESET(X+lfY )

85 GOT04()

90 IFTNOTTHEN20

95 G0SUB875

100 G0T03

500 REM ** COMP HEAD-l *)|(

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB( 25)'’R0DNEY ALPHA-i" tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(15 )"BASIC VERSION WITH SCORE COMPILING-

517 PRINT:INPUT"H0W many test cycles"»T

520 FORL^OTO10:print:NEXT

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"?S$IRETURN

550 REM 4* FIELD-1

552 Fl=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321;F4=16383

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF==F3T0F4:P0KEFrl76:NEXT

565 F0RF=FlT0F4STEP64:P0KEFrl91:NEXT

570 F0RF=-F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEFrl9i:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM 44 INITIAL-2 44

610 x=io :y=io:i=i:.j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

625 REM 44 INITIAL COMP-1 44

630 fqrn=itoio:form=ito2:t(NfM)=o:next:next

635 RETURN

650 REM 44 FETCH NEU-1 44

660 RI = RND< 5 ):RJ = RND( 5)

665 IFRI-3ANDR.J=3THEN660


                                                        89


===== PDF PAGE 092 =====

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINK X+SGN( I )*XP»Y+SGN( J mP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:next

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE COMP-1 *»

805 U$="#♦#♦♦"

810 E=D/C

845 PRINTeOf"CREATURE NO*"

850 PRINTei5»"N0* CONTACTS"

852 PRINTG35>"N0* GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"

855 PRINTG87»C:PRINT01O8»D

857 PRINT064»TN" OF"T

860 PRINTeil9»USINGU$»E

865 RETURN

875 REM ** PRINT COMP-1 **

880 CLS:PRINT"C0MPILED results F0R"TN-1"CYCLES"{print
     {PRINT

885 F0RN=lT010:FC=T<Nfl ){FD=T( N»2 )

890 PRINTN)|tlO" = " i {PRINTUSINGU$5FD/FC{NEXT

895 PRINT{PRINT{INPUT"D0NE">X${RETURN

900 REM       COMPILE-1 **

905 IFC/10<>INT(C/10)RETURN

910 TF=INT(C/10 ){T<TFfl )=T( TF»1 )+C{T< TFf2)=T( TF»2)+D

915 IFTF<10RETURN

920 TN=TN+1{RETURN




90


===== PDF PAGE 093 =====

                      A New Sensation                      7
                               and Alpha-ll

All Alpha-Class machines make purely random responses to
changes they sense in their environments. The ALPHA-I crea¬
ture featured in Chapters 3 through 6 has only one sensory
mechanism and one way to respond: It senses only light-colored
segments on the screen and responds by attempting to get away
from them.
      Alpha-Class adaptive machines need not be limited to single
sensory and response mechanisms. There can be any number of
sense/response mechanisms, and there are no limits on how
simple or complex those mechanisms can be. The defining
feature of an Alpha-Class machine is that it makes random
responses or, in a few cases, pre-programmed responses.
      The heirarchy of Alpha-Class machines can be divided into
subgroups such as Alpha-I, Alpha-II and so on. An Alpha-I
version is the simplest possible Alpha-Class machine. As shown
in the previous chapters, ALPHA-I senses two, mutually exclu¬
sive conditions in its environment, namely being in a condition of
running into a barrier or in a condition where it is free from any
barrier contact. Furthermore, ALPHA-I responds to any
barrier-contact situation with a negative “flight” response. The
only response mechanism is one aimed at getting the creature
away from such barriers.
      The antithesis of running into a barrier is being free from
such a condition which is a more desirable condition. It responds
by performing the response that works. In other words, an
ALPHA-I that is free from negative conditions in its environment
keeps on moving the same way.
      An Alpha-II machine is a bit more sophisticated. It has the
ability to distinguish a larger number of environmental condi¬
tions and react accordingly. The reactions are still randomly
selected, however. Specifically, the ALPHA-II creature intro¬
duced in this chapter can sense the difference between two

                                                                91


===== PDF PAGE 094 =====

different kinds of lighted segments on the screen, lighted seg¬
ments that flash and lighted segments that do not flash.
     In this case, lighted segments that flash are considered
positive, desirable elements of the environment-running into a
flashing lighted segment is “good.” Running into a non-flashing
lighted segment, however, is still considered “bad,” and
ALPHA-II responds accordingly.
     The “good” flashing light on the screen is going to be a nest
where the creature presumably gathers nourishment or engages
in some other form of activity vital to its survival. Of course,
this is a computer simulation and as such isn’t absolutely neces¬
sary. However, if ALPHA-II were a real machine, the “nest”
could represent a battery charger or a similar kind of energy
source.
     Figure 7-1 shows the screen format for this ALPHA-II
project. The border is made up of non-flashing line segments and
is thus considered something to be avoided. The next rectangle
near the center of the screen, on the other hand, flashes one
time whenever (1) it is turned on and (2) the creature makes
contact with any lighted segment on the screen. Whenever the
nest is turned off, it no longer flashes and is treated as a barrier
to be avoided.
     Whenever the creature senses contact with the nest and the
nest is turned on, the creature responds by resting at the nest
until it is turned off. In a sense, this resting response is an
inborn reflex, the first and one of a very few pre-programmed
responses used anywhere in this book.
     Having this one pre-programmed response built into an
Alpha-Class machine does not really violate the purity of the
adaptive machine. Alpha-Class machines do not have the capac¬
ity for learning how to respond to a positive influence of this
kind, and in the real world, an inborn reflex of this kind would be
absolutely essential to survival. Rest assured, higher-order
machines described later in this book will have to learn to deal
with the nest situation on their own, first by trail and error and
then by purposeful intent.
THE BASIC ALPHA-II PROJECT
     The ALPHA-II program is started just as the ALPHA-I pro¬
grams are. Subroutines in the early part of the program draw the
basic rectangular border and initialize the position and motion of
the creature. A new subroutine draws the nest figure in the
middle of the border area and initially sets it to an ON condition.

92


===== PDF PAGE 095 =====

Fig. 7-1. Screen format for BASIC ALPHA-II.

     The creature bounces around within the confines of the
border figure, accumulating data for the total number of contacts,
number of good moves, and an overall success score. As long as
the nest is turned on, however, you will notice that the nest
flashes off and on each time the creature encounters the border
figure. The border figure does not flash, however, and that is the
clue the creature uses to distinguish a border contact from a
contact with the nest.
     The nest remains turned on until the creature makes con¬
tact with it. This might take only two or three moves, or maybe
twenty or more. At any rate, a contact with the nest figure also
causes the nest to flash, and since the creature is built to sense
flashing-light activity in its path, it knows it has made contact
with the nest figure.
     The creature then remains in the nest area until the nest is
switched off. The program includes a timing routine which
allows the nest to remain turned on several seconds after the
creature makes contact with it. At the end of that time, the
program turns off the nest, and it then appears as an obstacle to
be avoided. The creature responds by making random motions
aimed at getting away from the nest.
     Shortly after the creature moves away from the nest figure,
the program turns on the nest once again and the little creature
bounces around within the border until it makes contact with the

                                                               93


===== PDF PAGE 096 =====

 nest again. The nest remains on for several seconds and then
 goes off again. The creature moves away and the cycle starts all
 over again.
       The NO. FEEDS label shown in Fig. 7-1 keeps track of the
 number of times the creature makes contact with the nest while
 it is turned on. In essence, it is a measure of how successful the
 creature is at finding the nest.
       The whole project can run automatically, but for experimen¬
 tal purposes, it is possible to override the automatic feature of
 the nest and switch it on and off manually from the keyboard.
 The nest can be turned off at any time by striking the X key and
 turned on at any time by striking the F key. This manual feature
 gives you an opportunity to interact with the creature on the
 screen.
       While running these ALPHA-II experiments, bear in mind
that they are simulations of real situations. The border figure
represents qualities of the environment which could threaten the
existence of the robot—walls, cliffs, oceans, or enemy fortres¬
ses. The nest figure has a dual nature. It can be a good thing or a
bad thing, depending upon its condition at the moment. In a real
robot environment, the nest could represent a small source of
energy which is easily depleated. As long as there is energy
available (the nest is turned on), it is a “good” thing, but when
the nest is turned off, the energy is gone and spending time
dealing with it is a waste of valuable energy and time, energy
and time that would be better spent looking for a “live” nest.

FLOWCHART FOR BASIC ALPHA-II
     The BASIC ALPHA-II program is built around the ALPHA-I
with scoring program described in Chapter 4. This is entirely
consistent with the notion you are working with an evolutionary
process one that develops only by building upon earlier, more
primitive systems.
     As you look over the rather extensive flowchart in Fig. 7-2,
you should be able to see many processes that have become a
familiar part of your earlier work with ALPHA-I programs. In
fact, the flowchart is identical to the one for ALPHA-I with
scoring (Fig. 4-2), until you notice the Y response from the first
CONTACT conditional. This first CONTACT subroutine (the
one directly following SET MOVE) informs the creature it has
encountered something. The next step is to determine whether
that “something” is a switched-on nest, (a negative barrier) the
border figure, or a switched-off nest.

94


===== PDF PAGE 097 =====

      So after sensing the contact, the next conditional, NEST
ON, determines whether or not the nest is turned on. If indeed
the nest is turned on, the NEST ON conditional is satisfied and
the nest responds by being blanked from the screen. Seen the
BLANK NEST operation.
      After the nest figure is blanked off by S. 990 BLANK
NEST, the CONTACT subroutine is called again. The point of
this is to find out whether or not the path in front of the creature
has become clear. If the contact has been with a tumed-on nest,
this second running of the S.725 CONTACT subroutine will
show a clear path in front of the creature. On the other hand, if
the contact has been with the border figure, the creature’s path
will remain blocked by a non-flashing light.
      So the second S.725 CONTACT conditional, the one follow¬
ing BLANK NEST, is the operation that distinguishes the
tumed-on nest figure from the border figure.
      For the sake of this discussion, suppose the creature finds it
has made contact with the tumed-on nest. The N path from the
second contact conditional is thus in force, and the system
responds by replacing the nest figure on the screen.
      The flashing effect of the nest is achieved by S.990 BLANK
NEST and S.580 DRAW NEST. The first of these two sub¬
routines blanks the nest figure from the screen, and the second
restores the figure. This all happens so rapidly that you get the
impression the nest figure simply blinked off for some fraction of
a second
      Inserting an S.725 CONTACT subroutine between these
flashing steps merely serves as a convenient and simple way to
sense the difference between the nest and border figures. If,
after making contact with something on the screen, the creature
notes that the “something” disappears momentarily (no contact),
there is good reason to believe the contact is with the tumed-on
nest.
      Any time the nest is redrawn, it must be switched on again.
This is due to a peculiarity of the program, and it is not really a
vital part of the philosophy at work in the ALPHA-II scheme.
      So after the nest is blinked off and on, and the creature
notes that it has indeed contacted the nest, the NO. FEEDS
 score is incremented by the COUNT FEEDS block. The crea¬
 ture is then allowed to “feed” at the nest for a period of time
determined by BLINK/FEED TIME AND FEED DONE. While
the creature is “feeding,” its figure blinks rapidly on the screen,
expressing a feeling of happy excitement.

                                                                 95


===== PDF PAGE 098 =====

Fig. 7-2. Flowchart for BASIC ALPHA-II.


96


===== PDF PAGE 099 =====

      When FEED TIME is done, the nest is switched off. The
nest figure is not blanked from the screen, but rather it is
defined as turned off. You can note this condition by the fact that
the label within the nest figure changes from ON to OFF. All
this is done by the subroutine S.970 NEST OFF.
      The NO variable is then initialized to a value of 100, and the
flowchart enters a whole new phase of operation. The purpose of
the NO variable will be described a bit later in this discussion.
      Now, back up to the NEST ON conditional operation. The
previous part of the discussion assumed this conditional is

                                                                 97


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====

satisfied and that operations follow through BLANK NEST.
Suppose, however, the creature makes contact with something
 on the screen and the nest is not\ turned on at the moment. In this
 case, the NEST ON conditional is not satisfied and the program
proceeds from the N output. Note that an N output from NEST ON
 carries operations down to the same point that terminates the
 sequence of operations involved in a nest-on condition. In this
 case, all the nest-blanking and other feeding operations are bypass¬
 ed.
       Whenever the nest is turned off, any contact situation,
 whether it be with the border or nest figure, must be treated as an
undesirable condition. There is no point in tr5dng to determine
 whether the contact is with the border or nest, so the time-
 consuming BLANK NEST, CONTACT, and DRAW NEST opera¬
 tions can be bypassed.
      To conclude this discussion of the first major phase of opera¬
tions, suppose the creature makes contact with something on the
screen (the CONTACT conditional following SET MOVE is satis¬
fied). Furthermore, assume the nest happens to be turned on at the
moment (NEST ON is satisfied). S.990 dien erases the nest figure
from the screen and S.725 CONTACT is called again. This time,
however, suppose that CONTACT conditional is satisfied, thereby
directing operations from its Y output terminal. In spite of the fact
that the nest figure is erased from the screen at the time, the
creature still senses lighted segments in its path. Obviously this
means it has made contact with the non-flashing border figure. As a
result, the nest figure is drawn on the screen again and set to its ON
condition.
      When the nest is turned on, it blinks whether the creature
makes contact with the border or the nest figure. The flowchart
sequence NEST ON, BLANK NEST, and CONTACT are wholly
responsible for distinguishing nest and border contacts.
      The second major phase of the operation picks up at a
familiar C=C+1 block. The operations following C=C+1 is the
conventional Alpha-Class routine for selecting random responses
and updating the score figures. If you have been doing your
homework all along, ±is second phase, between C=C+1 and
BLINK, requires no further explanation.
      The final phase of the BASIC ALPHA-II program involves a
 number of conditional operations and housekeeping chores. Most
 of the operations in this final phase are devoted to the feature
 that allows you to turn the nest off and on manually.

98


===== PDF PAGE 101 =====

      Assume for the moment that the conditional operation
 labeled NO<=100 is satisfied (Y output), the system encounters
another conditional labeled NEST ON. If the nest is turned on at
the moment, the next question is whether or not you want it
turned off. If so, the third phase of the project is ended after
doing an S.970 NEST OFF subroutine. Otherwise, the phase is
concluded with the nest remaining on.
      If, on the other hand, the NEST ON conditional is not
satisfied, the implication is that the nest must be turned off. This
situation brings up the question WANT NEST ON? If so, the
phase ends only after doing S.950 NEST ON. Otherwise, the
system ends this phase with the nest remaining off.
      Next, consider the NO variable, the one initialized at 100
after the creature is through feeding at the nest. The overall
purpose of this variable is to turn on the nest automatically after
the creature has a chance to leave the nest.
      The third phase of the program begins with the conditional
NO <00. In essence, the operation is asking, “Has the creature
just completed a feeding operation at the nest?'' If so, NO has to
be greater than or equal to 100, because it is initialized at 100 at
the conclusion of a feeding operation.
       So immediately after doing a feeding operation, NO is equal
to 100 and the conditional NO1<100 is not satisfied. This brings
up yet another conditional related to the value of NO, NO>125.
If NO is less than 120 (but greater than 100), the system does an
operation labeled COUNT ON. This simply an NO=NO+l
statement which executed with every move the creature makes.
       Making a rather long story short, the NO counter begins
running the moment the creature ends a feeding operation and
continues running through 25 moves (the interval between
NO=100 and NO=125. The moment NO reaches 125, it is reset
to zero by NO=0 and the rest is turned on again by S.950 NEST
 ON.
       All of this gives the creature ample time to find its moves
for getting away from the nest before the nest is turned on again.
Unfortunately this is one of those peculiar programming situa¬
tions where the basic concept is simple, but the implementation
 is less straightforward.

SUBROUTINES FOR BASIC ALPHA-II
   Several subroutines carry over unchanged from the
ALPHA-I with scoring programs in Chapter 4. These include:

                                                                 99


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====

S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-1)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE(INiTIAL-2)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW -1)
Then, too, some of the ALPHA-I subroutines carry over with
minor modifications:
S.500 HEADING
S.800 UPDATE SCORE
      The entirely new subroutines are:
S.580 NEST FIG-1
S.950NESTON-1
S.970 NEST OFF-1
S.990 NEST BLANK
Modifications for S.500 Heading
      The HEADING subroutine is merely revised to reflect the
fact that the current program is an ALPHA-II NEST VERSION.
500 REM ♦* ALPHA-II HEAD-1**
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25)) “RODNEY ALPHA-II”iPRINT
515 PRINTTAB (25) “NEST VERSION”
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT “DO ENTER TO START”; S$:RETURN
          Variables introduced: L, S$
          Variables required to start: none
The operating format in this case is identical to the now familiar
ALPHA-I with scoring program.
Modifications for S.800 Update Score
     The changes in this common subroutine involve adding data
relating to the number of times the creature makes contact with
the nest when it is turned on. It introduces variable NF, the
number of feedings.
800 REM **UD NEST-1**
805 U$=“#.###”
810 E=D/C
845 PRINT® 0, “NO. FEEDS”
850 PRINT® 15, “NO. CONTACTS”
852 PRINT® 35, “NO. GOOD MOVES”
853 PRINT® $55, “SCORE”
855 PRINT® 87, C:PRINT 108, D
857 PRINT® 64,NF
860PRINT® 119, USINGU$;E
865 RETURN
          Variables introduced E, U$
          Variables required at start: D,C, NF
Simply change the REM statement in line 800 and add the
statements in lines 845 and 857.

100


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====

S.580 DRAW NEST Subroutine
     This new subroutine is a rather straightforward application
of some POKE statements. The objective is to draw the nest
rectangle near the middle of the border area.
580 REM ♦* NEST FIG-1 **
582 FA=15900:FORF=FATO FA+7:POKEF,176;NEXT
585 FORF=FA-l-64TOFA+71 :POKEF,191 :NEXT
587 FORF=FA+128TOFA-l-135:POKEF,131 :NEXT
590 RETURN

       Variables introduced: FA, F
       Variables required to start: none
You can check the operation of the subroutine by running the
following test routine:
1 CLS:GOSUB550
2 GOSUB580
3 INPUTX$;G0T01
This assumes, of course, that S.550 DRAW FIELD is already
resident in the program memory. You should see both the border
figure and nest drawn on the screen, and you can repeat the
drawing process any number of times by striking the ENTER
key.
S.950 Nest On andS.970 NEST OFF Subroutines
      These two subroutines are responsible for turning the nest
on and off. These are not the operations responsible for actually
blanking and restoring the nest figure. Rather, they alter the
feeding status.
      Whenever S.950 NEST ON is run, line 955 uses the
computer’s POKE feature to position the characters ON near the
middle of the nest figure. This is for the convenience and
enlightenment of the experimenter. The real NEST ON task is
that of setting the nest flag status to 1. Whenever the nest status
flag, variable FL, is equal to 1, the nest is turned on and ready
to service the needs of the creature.
      S.970 NEST OFF sets the feed status flag, FL, to zero (line
980) and prints the message OFF in the nest figure.
950 REM ** NEST ON-1 **
955 POKEFA+66C 79:POKEFA-h67, 78:POKEFA+68,128
960FL=1:RETURN
970 REM ** NEST OFF-1 **
975 POKEFA-l-66, 79:POKEFA+67, 70:POKEFA-h68, 70
98OFL=0:RETURN

         Variables introduced: FL
         Variables required at start: FA

                                                               101


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====

If you'd like to check out these subroutines, try this test
program:
1 CLS:GOSUB550
2 GOSUB580
3 INPUTX$
4IFFL=0THEN7
5GOSUB970
6 G0T01
7 GOSUB950
8 G0T01
     This program first draws the border and basic nest figures,
then allows you to switch the nest ON and OFF alternately by
striking the ENTER key. Be sure to delete this test program
before attempting to run the main program later on.
S.9900 BLANK NEST Subroutine
     This is the subroutine that actually blanks the nest figure
from the screen whenever the creature is attempting to sense its
presence. Like its DRAW NEST counterpart, it uses POKE
graphics. In this case, however, POKE inserts spaces that
effectively remove the image from the screen.
990 REM NEST BLANK
992 FORF=FATOFA+7:POKEF, 128:NEXT
994 FORF=FA+64TOFA+71 :POKEF, 128:NEXT
996 FORF=FA+128TOFA+135:POKEF,128:NEXT
998 RETURN

         Variables introduced: none
         Variables required at start: FA
THE BASIC ALPHA-II MASTER PROGRAM
     Although the ALPHA-II master program is built upon the
ALPHA-I with scoring program from Chapter 4, the alterations
are so extensive that it is necessary to rewrite the whole thing
from scratch. Fitting in a new line here and there, and altering a
few other lines simply creates an unwieldy mess.
     The program follows the flowchart in Fig. 7-2 rather
closely. In fact, if you've had some trouble following the
rationale of the flowchart, you might get some valuable insight
by comparing it with this master program listing.
5 REM ♦* ALPHA-II NEST MASTER **
1OGOSUB500
15CLS;GOSUB550
2OGOSUB580
25 GOSUB600
30 NO=O:GOSUB950
35 X=X-I-I:Y=Y+ J;GOSUB725
40 IFCO=0THEN110

102


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====

 45 IFFL=0THEN85
 50 GOSUB990
 55 GOSUB725
 60IFCO=1THEN82
 65 GOSUB580:GOSUB950
 7ONF=NF+1FORT=0TO25;SET(X,Y);SET (X+1,Y):RESET (X,Y):RE-
    SET(X+1,Y):NEXT
 75 GOSUB970
 80 NO=100:GOTO85
 82 GOSUB580:GOSUB950
 85 C=C+1:GOSUB800
 90 SET(X,Y):SET (X+1,Y):RESET (X,Y):RESET(X+1,Y):GOSUB650
 95 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
100IFCO=1THEN85
105 D=D+1 :GOSUB800
110 SET(X, Y) :SET(X+1. Y): RESET(X, Y): RESET(X+1, Y)
115IFNO<100THEN135
12OIFNO>=125THEN130
125 NO=NO+1 :G0T035
130 NO=0:GOSUB950
135IFFL=1THEN145
140 F$=INKEY$;IFF$=“F”GOSUB950
142 G0T035
145 F$=INKEY$:IFF$=“X”GOSUB970
150 G0T035
      The only features of this program that aren’t specifically
described on the corresponding flowchart are the applications of
the INKEY$ functions in lines 140 and 145. These are the
program operations that allow you to control the status of the
nest by striking either the F or X key on the keyboard.
      Lines 140 and 145 are directly related to WANT NEST ON
and WANT NEST OFF. If the nest happens to be off, and you
want it on, striking the F key will do the job as soon as program
operations reach the WANT NEST ON conditional operation.
Likewise, you can turn off the nest by striking the X key, and
when program operations reach the WANT NEST OFF condi¬
tional, it will indeed execute the NEST OFF subroutine to do
the job for you.
      If you use neither of these keys and their associated IN-
KEY$ functions, the nest operations will remain wholly automa¬
tic, turning off the nest after the creature has fed itself for a
moment and then turning the nest on again when the creature
has moved away.

LOADING BASIC ALPHA-^II
     As mentioned several times through this chapter, the pro¬
gram ought to be built upon the ALPHA-I with scoring program
and subroutines described in Chapter 4. You can save yourself a

                                                             103


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====

lot of time by loading that older program before you start making
the revisions and additions required for ALPHA-II.
      Be sure to delete the entire ALPHA-I master program
before entering its ALPHA-II counterpart. Otherwise you are
going to end up with some unwanted program statements in the
listing.

WHAT YOU SHOULD EXPECT FROM THE PROGRAM
      With the program fully loaded as described, start it by
entering the RUN command. You should be greeted with the
heading statement, and it should remain on the screen until you
strike the ENTER key.
      After that, the border figure should be drawn on the screen,
followed by the nest figure with ON written in the middle of it.
Then the creature should appear near the upper left-hand comer
of the border area, moving downward and toward the right. It
will not make contact with the nest figure on this first set of
moves. Once the creature contacts the bottom of the screen, the
scoring messages should appear across the top of the screen,
and the whole thing is fully underway.
      Assuming the nest is still displaying its ON status, each
contact the creature makes with the border figure ought to cause
the nest figure to disappear for a moment, but only long enough
for the creature to sense it has hit the border and not the nest
itself. Remember it is this flashing effect of the nest that lets the
creature sense that it is different from the the border figure.
      Eventually the creature will make contact with the nest.
You will see the creature standing still at the nest, but flashing
rather rapidly. Why not flash like that, he’s quite happy.
      The creature’s moment of bliss is soon over, however, and
you will see the nest status change from ON to OFF. Now the
nest is something to be avoided, and the creature will respond
with random motions intended to get it away from the situation.
      Sooner or later the creature finds a way to get away from
the nest (sometimes leaving a little bit out of it). Shortly after
leaving the nest, you will see the nest status returning from
OFF to ON. In the meantime, the scoring figures will show an
additional nest contact and some changes in the other scores as
well. The program ought to run automatically in this fashion for
an indefinitely long period of time.
      If you want to participate in the activity, you can always
override the automatic nest-status feature by striking the F and

104


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====

X keys. Unless the creature is busy trj^ing to get out of a contact
situation, depressing the F key almost immediately sets the nest
status to ON. And by the same token, striking the X key sets the
nest status OFF. Returning the system to its automatic function
is a simple matter of striking the F key to turn on the nest.

ALPHA-II NEST WITH COMPILE
     For the sake of future reference and sound scientific proce¬
dure, you ought to compile a learning curve for this nest-
responsive ALPHA critter. The general operating procedures
and rationale for compiling this sort of statistical information
have already been described in Chapter 6. The only significant
difference here is that the data includes information regarding
nest contacts as well as contacts with the border figure.
     The compiling program featured here runs much more
slowly, partly because the program itself is a bit slower than
ALPHA-I and partly because the critter spends some extra
amount of time feeding at the next figure. So you should allow at
least one full day to run a hundred different creatures—all
automatically, of course.
     Figure 7-3 shows the display as it appears during the
compiling runs. GREAT NO. shows you which creature is going


        GREAT. NO.   FEEDS   TACTS   OK MOVES   FSCOR   SCORE
        1 OF 10      1       29      12         0.034   0.414




Fig. 7-3. Screen format for ALPHA-II NEST WITH COMPILE.

                                                                105


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====

through its paces at the moment and the total number of
creatures you have specified for the experiment.
      FEEDS indicates the number of nest feedings the on-line
creature has made, while TACTS shows the total number of
contacts, both with the nest and border figure. (The number of
contacts with the border figure can be calculated by subtracting
FEEDS from TACTS).
      OK MOVES shows the number of good moves the creature
has made to the moment. FSCOR is the percentage of contacts
that have been with the nest (FEEDS/TACTS). While SCORE
is the overall success score (OK MOVES/TACTS.)
      Figure 7-4 shows the learning curve and data display that
resulted from running a hundred such creatures. Doing this
yourself is a simple matter of starting the program and respond¬
ing to the message, HOW MANY TEST CYCLES?, by entering
100 and then taking a hike for a day while the computer does the
rest of the work.
      The compiled results of the experiment shows DECADE,
SCORE, and FEED. DECADE indicates which group of ten
contacts (1 indicates contacts 1 through 10, 2 indicates contacts
11 through 20, etc.). SCORE is the compiled score and FEED is
the compiled percentage of contacts resulting in a feeding opera¬
tion.




Fig. 7-4. Data and curve for 100 creatures run with ALPHA-II NEST WITH
COMPILE.

106


===== PDF PAGE 109 =====

   The curve in Fig. 7-4, representing this data, shows a fairly
steady success score of about .49 and a feed contact score of
about. 031.
     Notice that the CONTACT SCORE does not slope down¬
ward from .54 during the first ten contacts as it does in the
ALPHA learning curve back in Fig. 6-1. This flatter curve during
the initial contacts is a reflection of fact that the glitch described
in Chapter 6 has been ironed out. You will find the necessary
correction in Subroutine 600 INITIAL COMP-3.

LOADING ALPHA-II NEST COMPILE
     The following program uses many of the subroutines and
the master program from BASIC ALPHA-II described in the first
part of this chapter. If you have loaded BASIC ALPHA-II onto
cassette tape, loading this compile version into the system is a
matter of reloading BASIC ALPHA-II into your computer and
making the revisions suggested here.
     The subroutines used without modification are:
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-1)
S.580 DRAW NEST (NEST FIG-1)
S.950 NEST ON (NEST ON-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.990 BLANK NEST (NEST BLANK)
S.970 NEST OFF (NEST OFF-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)

Subroutines to be modified are:
S. 500 HEADING (ALPHA-II HEAD-2)
S.600 ITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL COMP-3)
S.800UPDATE DISPLAY (UD NEST-2)

The new routines are:
S.625 INITIALIZE SERIES (INITIAL COMP-2)
S.900 COMPILE RUN (COMPILE-2)
S.875 COMPILE SERIES (PRINT COMP-2)

      The subroutines to be modified are shown here. In most
instances, you can make the modifications with a few simple
editing operations. Especially note that the starting position and
initial direction codes are selected by S.600 which uses FETCH
NEW MOVE (S.650) to pick these values.

500 REM **ALPHA-II HEAD-2**
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY ALPHA-II”:PRINT

                                                                  107


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====

                                                      S,58«




Fig. 7-5. Flowchart for ALPHA-II NEST WITH COMPILE.

108


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====

515 PRINTTAB (15)“NEST VERSION WITH COMPILE”
517 PRINT:INPUT‘‘HOW MANY TEST CYCLES”;T
520 FORL=0TO8:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT“DO ENTER TO START”;S$;RETURN
Variables introduced: T, L,S$
Variables required at start: none
Test routine
  1 GOSUB500
  2 INPUTX$:PRINTT:INPUTX$:G0T01
600 REM ** INITIAL COMP -3 **
605 GOSUB 650
610 X=RI+25:Y=RJ+25:GOSUB650
612 l=Rl-3:J=RJ-3
615 C=0:D=
620 RETURN
   Variables required at start: None
   Subroutine required to run: 650 FETCH NEW-1

                                                 109


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====

800 REM**UD NEST-2
805 U$=‘‘#.###”
845 PRINT® 0, “GREAT. NO”
850 PRINT® 15. “FEEDS”
852 PRINT® 25, “TACTS”
853 PRINT® 35, “OK MOVES”
854 PRINT® 47, “FSCOR”:PRINT® 57, “SCORE”
855 PRINT® 64,TN”OF“T:PRINT®79,NF:PRINT®89,C:PRINT® 99,D:
    PRINT® 11 1,USINGU$:NF/CPRINT® 121,USINGU$;D/C
865 RETURN
   Variables introduced: U$
  Variables required at start: TN, T, NF, C, D
Test routine
1 CLS:C=T:GOSUB800
2 INPUTXS G0T01
      The new subroutines to be entered from scratch are:
625 REM**INITIAL COMP-2**
630 FORN=1TO10:FORM=1TO3:T(N,M)= 0:NEXT:NEXT
635 RETURN
900 REM** COMPILE-2 **
905 !FC/10<>INT(C/10)RETURN
91OTF=INT(C/10):T(TF,1)=T(TF,1)-hC:T(TF,2)=T(TF,2)-HD:T(TF,3)=T(TF,3)
    +NF
915IFTF<10RETURN
920 TN=TN-H:RETURN
875 REM**PRINT COMP-2**
880CLS:PRINT“COMPILED RESULTS FOR “TN-1”“CYCLES”:PRINT
    :PRINT
883 PRINT“DECADE”, “SCORE”, “FEED
885 FORN=1T010:FC=T(N,1):FD=T(N,2);FE=T(N,3)
890 PRINTN:PRINTUSINGU$:FD/FC;PRINTTAB(32)USINGU$:FE/FC:NEXT
895 INPUT“DONE”:X$:RETURN
     Variables introduced: N, FC, FD, FE, X$
     Variables required at start: T(N,1), T(N,2), T(N,3) TN
     The main controlling program is built around the one shown in
the earlier part of this chapter. Carefully compare your listing on
lines 5 through 150 with the version shown here. Insert or modify
the program as required. It really shouldn’t take you very long to
get the job done.
5 REM ** ALPHA-II COMPILED NEST MASTER **
7DIMT(10,3)
8TN=1
10 GOSUB500
12 GOSUB625
15CLS:GOSUB550
17 NF=0
20 GOSUB580
25 GOSUB600
30 NO=0GOSUB950
35 X=X-l-l:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
40 IFCO=0THEN110
45 IFFL=0THEN85
50 GOSUB990
55 GOSUB725
60 IFCO = 1THEN 82
65 GOSUB580:GOSUB950

110


===== PDF PAGE 113 =====

 7ONF=NF+1:FORT=0TO25:SET(X,Y):SET(X+1,Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X
    +1,Y):NEXT
 75 GOSUB970
 80 NO=100:GOTO85
 82 GOSUB580;GOSUB950
 85 C=C+1:GOSUB900
 87 IFC>=100THEN155ELSEGOSUB800
 9OSET(X,Y):SET(X+1Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X+1Y):GOSUB650
 95 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
100 IFCO=1THEN85
105 D=0+1;GOSUB800
110SET(X,Y):SET(X+1Y):RESET(X,Y):RESET(X+1Y)
115IFNO<100THEN 135
120IFNO>125 THEN 130
125 N0=N0+1:G0T035
130 NO=0:GOSUB950
135 IFFL=1THEN145
140 F$=INKEY$;IFF$=“F”GOSUB950
142 G0T035
145 F$=INKEY$:IFF$=“X”GOSUB970
150 G0T035
155 IFTN=THEN15
160 GOSUB875
165 G0T08

If you have an doubts at all about whether or not your have entered
things properly, compare your composite listing with the ALPHA-
II NEST COMPILE listing at the end of this chapter.
FlowchartforAlpha-ll Nest Compile
      The flowchart for this compiling program is shown in Fig. 7-5.
It is presented here without any special commentary. If you have
been doing your homework and following the discussions, you will
see it is a rather straightforward combination of the flowcharts for
BASIC ALPHA-II (Fig. 7-2) and the flowchart for ALPHA-I COM¬
PILE in Fig. 6-3.
Some Comments On Running Alpha-ll Nest Compile
     Once the program is initiated, it is fully automatic through the
end of the project. In fact, the final results are relevant only if you
do not interfere with it—keep your fingers off the keys that let you
control the ON/OFF state of the nest manually. Let the thing run
on automatic at all times. Otherwise you’ll pay for your fun with
some screwy results.
COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS
Basic Alpha-ll Program Listing
 S   REIM 4-4 ALF'HA-ii NEST   MASTER 44
10   GOSUB500
15   CLS:GD3UB550
20   G0SUB580
25   G03UB6<)0


                                                                  111


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====

30 N0=0 :G0SUB95()
35 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725
40 IFCO=0THEN110
45 IFFL=0THEN85
50 G0SUB990

55 G0SUB725

60 IFC0=1THEN82
65 G0SUB580:G0SUB950
70 NF=NF + 1:FORFT=OT025:SET< X»Y ):SET< X+1»Y ):RESET( x»y >
   :reset< x+ifY);next
75 GOSUB970

80 no=ioo:goto85

82 GOSUB580:GOSUB950
85 C=C+1:GOSUB800

90 SET(XfY):SET(X41>Y):RESET(XfY ):RESET( X+1»Y ):GOSUB650

95 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725
100 IFC0=1THEN85
105 D=D+1:G0SUB800
110 SET( XrY ):SET(X+1»Y):RESET(XyY ):RESET< X+1»Y )

115 IFNO<100THEN135

120 IFN0>=125THEN130

125 N0=N0+1:G0T035

130 N0=0:G0SUB950

135 IFFL=1THEN145
140 F$=INKEY$aFF$=’'F“GOSUB950

142 G0T035

145 F$=INKEY$:iFF$="X“GOSUB970

150 G0T035

500 REM ** ALPHA-II. HEAD-1 **

505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB( 25)"RODNEY ALPHA-II"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(25 )- NEST VERSION-

520 forl=otoio:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START”»S$:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 *»


112


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383

555 F0RF=FlT0F2tP0KEFTl31JNEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

580 REM       NEST FIG-1 **

582 FA=15900:F0RF=FAT0FA+7:PQKEFf176:NEXT

585 F0RF=FA+64T0FA+71tPOKEFf191tNEXT

587 F0RF=FA+128T0FA+135:P0KEF»131:NEXT

590 RETURN

600 REM )|o|t INITIAL-2 t*

610 x=6o:y=i():i=o:j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW-1 **

660 RI = RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5)

665 IFRI=3ANDR.J=3THEN66()

670 RETURN
725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINT(X+SGN(I )*XPrY+SGN(J )»YP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:NEXT

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REM ♦♦ UD NEST-1 »♦

805 □$=”♦♦♦♦♦•'
810 E=D/C

845 PRINTeO»''NO* FEEDS”

850 PRINTei5»”N0» CONTACTS”

852 PRINT@35»"N0» GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"


                                                    113


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====

855 PRINT087fC:PRINTei()8»D

857 PRINTe64»NF

860 PRINT0119»USINGU$»E

865 RETURN

950 REM       nest ON-1 »»

955 POKEFA+66»79 t POKEFA+67 r 78:P0KEFA+68»128

960 FL=i:RETURN

970 REM tt NEST OFF-1

975 POKEFA+66 r791POKEFA+67 f70;POKEFA+68»70

980 rL=0:RETURN

990 REM ** NEST BLANK

992 forf==^fatofa+7:pokef»128:next

994 FORF-FA+64TOFA+71:POKEF»128:NEXT

996 F0RF=FA+128T0FA+135:P0KEFf128:NEXT

998 RETURN
Aipha-ll Nest Compile Composite Listings
 5 REM ** ALPHA-II COMPILED NEST MASTER »*

 7 DIMT( 10^3 )

 8 TN=1
10 GOSUB500

12 G0SUB625

15 CLS:GOSUB550

17 NF=0

20 GOSUB580

25 GOSUB600

30 N0=0:G0SUB950

35 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

40 IFCO=0THEN110

45 IFFL=0THEN85

50 G0SUB990

55 G0SUB725


114


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====

60 IFC0*1THEN82

65 GOSUB580:GOSUB950

70 NF=NF+1;FORFT*OT025:SET( XfY ):SET< X+lfY )JRESET( X»Y )
   :RESET( X+lrY)tNEXT

75 G0SUB970

80 no=ioo:goto85

82 GOSUB580;GOSUB950

85 C=C+1:GOSUB900

87 IFC>=100THEN155ELSEGOSUB800

90 SET< XfY ):SET<X+lfY):RESET( XfY ):RESET<X+1fY ):GOSUB650

95 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

100 IFC0=1THEN85

105 D=D+1:GOSUB800

110 SET(XfY ):SET(X+lfY ):RESET(XfY ):RESET( X+lfY)

115 IFNO<100THEN135

120 IFNO>=125THEN130

125 N0=N0+1:G0T035

130 N0=0:G0SUB950

135 IFFL=1THEN145

140 F$=INKEY$:iFF$="F"GOSUB950

142 G0T035

145 F$=INKEY$tIFF$=“X-GOSUB970

150 G0T035

155 IFTN<=TTHEN15

160 G0SUB875

165 G0T08

500 REM ** ALPHA-ii HEAD-2

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25 )“RODNEY ALPHA-iI"IPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(15 )• NEST VERSION WITH COMPILE-

517 print:INPUT-HOW MANY TEST CYCLES"JT

520 forl=oto8:print:next


                                                          115


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====

525 INFUT"DO ENTER TO START">S$IRETURN

550 REM        FIELD-1
552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFrl3i:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT
c.n cn




     75 RETURN
     30 REM    NEST FIG-1

532 fa=i59oo:forf=fatofa+7:pokef»176:next

 585 F0RF=--FA+64T0FA+71 tPOKEFr 191 :NEXT

 587 F0RF=FA+128T0FA+135:P0KEF»131:NEXT

 590 RETURN

 600 REM m INITIAL COMP-3 **
 605 GOSUB650

 610 X=RIT25:Y=R.J+25:GOSUB650

 612 I=RI~3:J=R.J-3

 615 C=0:D:=0
  620 RETURN

  625 REM       INITIAL COMP-2

  630 FORN = 1T010:FORM=1T03:T( NfM)=0:NEXT:NEXT

  635 RETURN
  650 REM iHt FETCH NEW-1

  660 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND(5)

  665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

  670 RETURN
  725 REM       CON SENSE-1 **

  730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I):F0RYP=1T01+ABS< J)

  735 IFPOINTC X+SGN(I )«XPrY+SGN( J )»YP )=-lTHEN750
   740 NEXTtNEXT

   745 C0=0:RETURN

   750 co=i:return


116


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====

800 REM *t UD NEST-2 tt

805 U$=

845 PRINTeOf"GREAT* NO*"

850 PRINT015»"FEEDS"

852 PRINT025f"'TACTS"

853 PRINTe35»"0K MOVES"

854 PRINTe47 >"FSCOR"IPRINTSS?t"SCORE"

855 PRINTe64»TN" 0F"T:PRINTe79»NFiPRINTBS?»C:PRINT099»D;
    PRINTeillfUSINGUf>NF/ C:PRINTei21»USINGU$fD/C
865 RETURN

875 REM tt PRINT COMP-2 »*

880 CLS:PRINT-C0MPILED results F0R"TN- 1-CYCLES":PRINT
    :print
883 PRINT"DECADE-r"SCORE-f"FEED

885 F0RN=1T010:FC«T<N»1 ){FD»T<Nr2):FE=T<Nr3>

890 PRINTNf:PRINTUSINGU$JFD/FCf tPRINTTABC 32)USINGU$>FE/FC
    tNEXT
895 INPUT-DONE">X$:RETURN

900 REM ** COMPILE-2 *»

905 IFC/10<>INT(C/10)RETURN

910 TF=INT(C/10 );T( TFf1 )*T( TFr1 )+CJT( TFf2)=T< TFf2 )+D:T(TF
    f3)»T( TFf3)+NF
915 IFTF<10RETURN

920 TN=TN+i:RETURN

950 REM »» NEST ON-1 »»

955 POKEFA+66 r79:POKEFA+67 r781POKEFA+681128

960 FL=i:RETURN

970 REN      NEST OFF-1 *♦

975 POKEFA+66»791POKEFA+67»701POKEFA+68 f 70

980 fl=o:return

990 REM ** NEST BLANK **

992 F0RF=FAT0FA+7:P0KEF»128:NEXT

994 F0RF=FA+64T0FA+71tP0KEF»128:NEXT

996 F0RF=FA+128T0FA+135;P0KEFf128:NEXT

998 RETURN

                                                            117


===== PDF PAGE 120 =====

              Gearing Up
              For More Alpha-ll Activity


The ALPHA-II schemes described in the previous chapter are
intended to show a smooth transition from Level-I to Level-II
programming. The techniques are rather cumbersome, however,
and they promise to get worse as one attempts to apply Level-II
features to the higher-order BETA and GAMMA creatures.
     So it is necessary to change gears at this point and intro¬
duce some new programs and subroutines which are better
equipped to deal with multiple sensory and response
mechanisms. You will find this gear-changing routine being used
throughout this book. All of the BETA-I and GAMMA-I prog¬
rams, for example, evolve quite naturally and easily from earlier
Level-I programs. Whatever you do with a Level-I creature at
one point carries over to more sophisticated levels later on. By
the same token, the programs and subroutines for ALPHA-II
creatures, the ones presented in this chapter, carry over to
BETA-II and GAMMA-II schemes.
     While the flowcharting is much the same, the actual pro¬
gramming techniques are quite different for Level-I and Level-II
creatures. In fact, as suggested in Chapter 2, you might choose
to skip over any further Level-II work until you have a chance to
do all the Level-I projects. Nothing will be lost in either
case—it’s up to you.

An Alpha-ll Conversion Demo Program
     This program demonstrates the process for converting from
standard Level-I to Level-II programming. The creature in this
case works very much like an ALPHA-I BASIC critter, and you
should study, load, test, and save this program. You will be

118


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====

using it later in this chapter, and elsewhere in this book, as the
starting point for building more significant Level-II creatures.
A New Alpha-ll Flowchart and Master Program
     Figure 8-1 shows the master-program flowchart for the
improved ALPHA-II creature. If you compare this flowchart with
the ALPHA-I BASIC flowchart in Fig. 3-1, you won’t find many
operational differences. Even the subroutine numbers are the
same. The only difference of any importance is the fact that the
new flowchart does not include a separate block for SET NEXT
MOVE. This particular operation, as you will see shortly, is now
included in MOVE.
     Eliminating SET NEXT MOVE is just one of a number of
changes in the programming format that are intended to reduce
the amount of required program memory and, at the same time,
speed up the operations.




Fig. 8-1. Flowchart for ALPHA-II
CONVERSION DEMO.




                                                              119


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====

     To get acquainted with the basic nature of the changes,
study this new ALPHA-II master program:

10 REM ALPHA-II MASTER 1 **
15CLS:GOSUB500:GOSUB550;GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN30
25 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:1 =R1-3:60SUB725=IF00<>32 THEN 25
30 GOSUB400:GOTO20
It doesn’t require a whole lot of BASIC programming savvy to
see that this master program is much “tighter” than the corres¬
ponding ALPHA-I, BASIC-1 MASTER in Chapter 3.
      Line 15 of ALPHA-II MASTER 1, for example, is a
multiple-statement line which includes a CLS statement, to clear
the screen initially, as well as the first three major subroutine
calls. This one line clears the screen, calls the HEADING
subroutine, draws the border figure, and initializes the creature.
     Line 20 then calls a revised version of the CONTACT
subroutine (the usual GOSUB 725), but contains the first major
programming difference. Note that the CONTACT subroutine
returns a value of CO that might be equal to 32 instead of 0.
      The number 32, you see, is the ACSII code number for a
space. The implication is that the creature sees blank spaces
ahead of it if CO=32. Any other number coming out of the
CONTACT operation indicates there is something other ±an a
blank space in the creature’s path. CO, the variable that is set to
some value during the CONTACT operation, indicates the nature
of any numeral or character that happens to he in the creature's
path.
     During the CONTACT subroutine, CO is set to some ASCII
value which uniquely describes the natre of any obstacle in the
creature’s path. If CO=32, the system knows that a blank
space—no visible barrier—exists. Otherwise, the system knows
something is getting in the way and what’s more, it can identify
the obstacle.
     This is a marked improvement over the ALPHA-I scheme
where the CONTACT subroutine looks for any kind of lighted
spot in the creature’s path yet cannot tell the difference between
an asterisk and the letter Z. Being able to sense the difference
between one sort of obstacle or figure and another is absolutely
vital to the function of Level-II creatures; this ASCII oriented
scheme gives your creatures the potential for discerning up to
96 different figures.

120


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====

      Comparing this idea with the nest-sensing scheme in Chap¬
ter 7, you will find it is no longer necessary to make the nest
figure blink on and off in order to distinguish it from the border
figure. Simply construct the nest from some keyboard characters
that are different from those used for making the border figure
and the creature won’t have any trouble distinguishing between
the two.
      Working with this new sensing mechanism calls for a know¬
ledge of ASCII codes. You must know, for instance, that a space
in ASCII is represented by decimal numeral 32 or that decimal
42 in ASCII represents an asterisk character. Appendix I in the
back of this book summarizes the ASCII code in a fashion that is
appropriate for these robot-intelligence projects.
       Line 20 in the ALPHA-H MASTER 1 program should have
more meaning to you. It says, “Do the CONTACT subroutine to
pick up the ASCII value of anything in the path ahead of the
 creature. If that value is 32 (blank space) the road is clear and
 it’s OK to MOVE (subroutine 400). After moving, return to line
 20 to check the path again.”
      In this case, finding an ASCII code not equal to 32 implies
that something is in the path ahead of the creature. Variable CO,
 in other words, is equal to something other than 32.
       The program responds to ASCII contacts other than 32 by
 doing a BLINK, followed by FETCH NEW MOVE, DECODE,
 and yet another test of the path ahead. This second CONTACT
 subroutine is called by the final statement in line 25. Here the
 program is saying, “K the path ahead is still not clear (CO is
 equal to something other than ASCII 32), go back to the begin¬
 ning of the line and pick another motion code.” The system
 continues cycling through line 25 of the master program until it
 comes across a motion code, or values of I and J, that get the
 creature away from whatever lays in its path.
       At this point in the project, the creature is searching for a
 clear path to get away from any obstacle, and it isn’t at all
 concerned with the nature of the obstacle. You can be sure you
 will have a chance to build programs for determining the exact
 nature of the obstacle later in this chapter.

Subroutines For ALPHA-II Conversion Demo
     The following sets of subroutines clearly demonstrate yet
another important and new feature of Level-II work—the appli¬
cation of POKE and PEEK graphics. Look at S.400 MOVE

                                                                121


===== PDF PAGE 124 =====

(MOVE II-1), for example. The purpose of this subroutine is to
move the creature from one place to the next across the screen.
The first statement in line 405 erases the present image of the
creature by doing a POKE NP, 32. There are two important
ideas inherent in this statement. The first is the use of an NP
variable to indicate the creature’s position on the screen. Using
POKE and PEEK graphics makes it difficult to use the X-Y
coordinate scheme which is applied to all Level-I programs. The
faster POKE and PEEK graphics calls for specifying the crea¬
ture’s position as a number between 15360 and 16383, decimal
versions of the memory space allocated to video display on the
TRS-80 computer system.
     The second idea included in the first statement in line 405
is the POKEing of ASCII 32, a space. In other words, the first
statement in line 405 of subroutine 400 says, “Put a blank space
(ASCII 32) in the position the creature currently holds (NP).
     The second statement in line 405 sets up the creature’s new
position on the screen. Variables I and J play the same role as in
earlier programs, acting as motion codes which set both the
creature’s direction and speed of motion. Instead of summing
those motion-code components with their respective X and Y
coordinates (which no longer exist), the system has to do the
same sort of job in a POKE format. This means moving the
creature to the left or right on the screen by summing the
current value of NP with the value of I and moving the creature
up or down by summ.ing the current value of NP with the product
of J times 64. Multiplying a POKE-position value by 64 effec¬
tively moves the POKE position one line in a vertical direction.
     The second statement in line 405 sets the creature’s new
position on the screen using the same I and J motion-code
format, but a different coordinate system. The third statement in
line 405 calls for POKEing an ASCII value of 140 into the new
creature position. What in the world is ASCII 140? It isn’t on the
chart in Appendix I. The Radio Shack TRS-80 uses ASCII-like
numerals to specify a group of figure-drawing operations. See
Appendix II. You can see from Appendix II that a 140 code prints
a small square on the screen at position NP. This is the new way
to draw the creature figure.
     In summary, S.400 MOVE uses POKE graphics and ASCII
codes to do three things: erase the image of the creature, set its
new position on the screen, and draw the image of the creature
in that new position.

122


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====

     Using POKE graphics and ASCII numbers to draw the
creature brings up a whole new world of possibilities regarding
the appearance of the creature. The creature had to appear as a
white rectangle in all previous programs because its image is
generated by SET graphics. Such programs do not allow you to
build more elaborate creature images without having to resort to
a lot of complicated and time-consuming SET routines. Now,
however, you can make the creature look like any one of the
figures in Appendix B and, for that matter, any of the characters
specified in Appendix A as well. The only reason the creature is
defined as TRS-80 ASCII in this case is so that it looks exactly
like earlier models. You will have a chance to play with crea¬
tures having alternate appearances later in this chapter.
     Now that you’ve had a chance to see how this new scheme
it built around POKE graphics, the meaning of the other sub¬
routines ought to make some sense. Subroutine 400 BLINK, for
instance, simply makes the creature figure blink on and off one
time. Line 455 of that subroutine says, “Erase the creature
figure by POKEing a blank space in its current position on the
screen and then restore the image by POKEing a 140.”

400 REM ** MOVE 11-1 *♦
405 POKENP,32:NP=NP-Hl-h64*J;POKENP,140:RETURN
450 REM ** BLINK lf-1 **
455 POKENP,32:POKENP,140:RETURN
500 REM ** HEAD 11-1
505 CLS: PRINTTAB (25)“ALPHA-II”:PRINTTAV(20)“CONVERSION DE-
    MO”:FORL=1T08:PRINT:NEXT:INPUT“DO ‘ENTER’ TO START”;
    S$;CLS:RETURN
550 REM     FIELD 11-1 ■**
555 F0RF=1553T015615:P0KEF,131 :NEXT
560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEF,176:NEXT
565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF,191 :NEXT
570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF,191:NEX T
575 RETURN
600 REM ** INITIAL 11-1 **
605 SF=0:NP=15968:GOSUB650;I=RI-3;J=RJ-3:RETURN
650 REM *■* FETCH NEW 11-1**
655RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655
650 RETURN
725 REM ** CON SENSE 11-1 **
730 FORSI=ABS{l)T01 STEP-1 :FORSJ=ABS(J)T01 STEP-1
735 CO=PEEK(NP-HSI*SGN(l)-h64*SJ*SGN(J)
740 IFC0O32RETURN
745NEXTSJ,SI:RETURN
     Subroutine 550 DRAW FIELD uses POKE graphics to draw
the image of the border figure. Note that the FOR . . . TO
statements use numbers within the video memory space for the

                                                              123


===== PDF PAGE 126 =====

TRS-80. The POKE statements in each case generate the
appropriate kinds of little rectangles.
      The INITIALIZE subroutine, S. 600, sets the creature’s ini¬
tial position (NP) at 15968, a position near the middle of the border
figure. This subroutine then calls the FETCH NEW MOVE sub¬
routine to pick up random values for the initial direction of
motion.. You have seen this sort of initializing trick, used in the
Levle-I X-Y coordinates, before in Chapter 6.
      The SF variable,which is initialized to zero in line 605, will be
used at a later time to allow the possibility of picking the creature’s
stop code (1=0,J=0). This is not permitted in any Level-I scheme,
but accounts for a new mode of response behavior for Level-II
creatures.
      The exclusive use of POKE graphics accounts for quite an
increase in the creature’s operating speed, but the return speed
comes about in new CONTACT subroutine. As in the case of
ALPHA-I creature, the system searches the path ahead, using
the current I and J motion code for determining the direction and
distance of the search. Now, the speed of the search is increased
threefold by the use of the POKE statement in line 375 of the
S.725 CONTACT subroutine.
      Incidentally, using this faster CONTACT subroutine brings
up the intriguing possibility of building creatures that have an
extended-range sensory capability. The critter can sense objects
well ahead of its current position on the screen, evaluate the nature
of those objects, and take any appropriate action long before a
contact is imminent. In a manner of speaking, this would give the
creature a special quality of long-range “vision.”

Loading ALPHA-II Conversion Demo
      Since every element of this program is new, it must be loaded
into your computer from scratch—the whole thing.
      NOTE: Do not test any portion of this program or run it until it
is loaded in its entirety, doublechecked against the composite
listing at the end of this chapter, and recorded on cassette tape.
Converting to POKE and PEEK graphics always brings up the
possibility of POKEing data into places in the computer memory
that throw the whole business out of whack. A slight error in the
CONTACT subroutine, for instance, can let the creature crawl
down off the bottom of the screen and begin POKEing around in
program memory space. Not only does this mess up the program,
but it might latch up the entire computer. The only way to rectify

124


===== PDF PAGE 127 =====

the problem when it happens is by turning off the computer and
restarting after a few seconds. Of course, this wipes out all the
programming you’ve entered, and you lose a lot of valuable exper¬
imenting time.
     So get that program onto cassette tape, as insurance against
catastrophe. If the worst happens, you can load the program again
from the tape and search for the error.
     As added insurance against such bad things happening, you can
write a fail-safe statement into the MOVE subroutine —IF
NP>16383 OR NP<15360STOP.This sets bounds on the position
of the creature, bringing the whole program to a halt if he begins
running off the screen.

What to Expect from this Program
     While this particular program does not express the truly
unique sensory capabilities of an ALPHA-II creature, it does de¬
monstrate the tremendous gain in speed. The screen format and
apparent activity on the screen is identical to that of ALPHA-I
BASIC. So what’s the point of the program anyway? It de¬
monstrates how it is possible to adjust the flowcharts in this book to
work according to alternate programming schemes, and it sets the
stage for building all Level-II creatures.

ALPHA-II WITH TRACK SENSE OPTION
     Now that you have the basic building-block program for
Level-II creatures, it is time to investigate some of the special
properties. The program in this case is one that lets the creature
leave behind a set of tracks, wherever it goes on the screen.
     You worked with that sort of track-drawing program back in
Chapter 5, but now you will find some of the nifty features of the
new scheme coming into the forefront.
     To get this one going in the shortest possible time, build it
around the ALPHA-II CONVERSION DEMO program. Load the
program into your computer and revise S.400 MOVE, S.500
HEADING and the master program as follows:
10 REM ** ALPHA-II MASTER 2 **
15 CLS:GOSUB500:GOSUB550;GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725;IFCO=320R(CO=42ANDTS=0)THEN30
25GOSUB450:GOSUB650;I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFNOT(CO=320R
   (CO=42ANDTS=0)THEN25
30 GOUSU B400 ;GOTO20
40 REM** MOVE 11-2 **
45 POKENP,42;NP=NO-H-h64*J:POKENP.140: RETURN


                                                                  125


===== PDF PAGE 128 =====

'500 REM** HEAD 11-2 **
5O5CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“ALPHA-II”:PRINTTAB(20)“TRACK SENSE OP¬
     TION”
510PRINT:PRINT;PRINT‘‘WANT CREATURE TO BE SENSITIVE TO
    TRACKS”:PRINTTAB(10)‘‘0- NO”:PRINTTAB(10)”1-YES”:INPUTTS
 515 CLS :ONTS-l-1 G0T052 0,525
 520 PRINT @ 960,“NOT SENSITIVE TO OWN TRACKS”:RETURN
 525 PRINT® 960,“SENSITIVE TO OWN TRACKS”:RETURN
Doublecheck your listing against the one at the end of ±is chapter
and record it on cassette tape before running it. If all is going well,
running the program should produce this message on the screen:
WANT CREATURE TO BE SENSITIVE TO TRACKS
     0-NO
     1 - YES

      If you respond by entering 0, the creature will leave tracks
wherever it goes, but will not respond to them whenever it ap¬
proaches earlier-drawn versions. Entering a 1 will make the crea¬
ture treat its own tracks as a barrier, creating an effect quite similar
to the PAINT INTO A CORNER GAME in Chapter 5.
      Two features of the new POKE scheme make this program
important. First, you will notice that the “tracks” look different
from the creature, itself. That was not the case in Chapter 5 where
the tracks and the creature were both white rectangles. The
second important point is that the creature is able to tell the
difference between the border figure and its own tracks; if you
elect to make the creature insensitive to its tracks, it responds
differently to the border and tracks.
      As far as the tracks looking different, asterisks to be exact,
look at the revised subroutine 400 MOVE. Instead of erasing the
image of the creature by means of a PKE NP, 32 at the beginning of
line 405, the system prints an asterisk in its place by doing a POKE
NP, 42. The creature is then moved to its new NP position and
redrawn as a square at POKE NP, 140. So every time the creature
moves from one point on the screen to another, its old image is
replaced with anasterisk.
      The extended logic statements in lines 20 and 25 of the master
program are responsible for picking up the difference between
clear space ahead (ASCII 32) and an asterisk (ASCII 42). In line 20,
for instance, if the CONTACT subroutine returns with CO=32, the
path ahead is clear and operations go immediately to line 30.
Operations will likewise go to line 30 if CONTACT returns CO=42
(asterisk ahead), but TS is equal to zero. TS is a variable which is
set to 1 or 0 during the HEADING operation. When TS=0, the
creature is supposed to be insensitive to its own tracks, and the

126


===== PDF PAGE 129 =====

expression CO=42 AND TS=0 means, “Fm running into an as¬
terisk, but Fve been told to ignore it.” However, if the CONTACT
subroutine called in line 20 returns a CO value that is not 32, or if
CO=42, and TS=1, it means trouble is ahead. The creature senses
some other figure or an asterisk to be dealt with. As a result, the
system resorts to the FETCH NEW MOVE routines in line 25. So
if this creature picks up anything in its path besides free space or an
asterisk when TS=0, it reacts as though it hit the border figure.
ALPHA-II WITH MULTIPLE-SENSE PRINTING
     Figure 8-2 shows the screen format for this program. You will
see that it consists of the usual border figure, a creature rectangle,
and a family of four different obstacles. The point of the program is
to show you in a very clear way that an ALPHA-II creature can
really sense the differences between objects within its “playpen.”
     In this case, the creature treats all objects the same way—by
running away from them. To let you know that the creature is
actually able to sense the differences between them, the system
prints an image of the last-sensed object near the upper left-hand
comer of the screen. Figure 8-2 shows a percent sign in the comer.
Apparently the creature has just moved away from the array of
percent-sign figures near the lower left-hand comer of its playpen.
     When it encounters the 0s, a 0 appears at the top of the screen,
and when it mns into the array of asterisks, an asterisk appears
there. The same idea holds for the pound signs and also the border
figure.
     The border figure, incidentally, is made up of TRS-80 ASCII
131 images along the top, 176 images along the bottom, and 191




Fig. 8-2. Screen format for ALPHA-II MULTIPLE SENSE PRINTING.

                                                                   127


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====

images along both sides. (See Appendix II). The creature not only
distinguishes the four arrays of special figures enclosed within the
border figure, but distinguishes contacts with the top, bottom and
sides of the border.
      This program is fun to watch, but it has some powerful impli¬
cations that go beyond a mere demonstration of how the creature
can tell the difference between different objects. Bear in mind that
one of the greatest deterrents to progress in modem robotics in the
insistence upon making machines that constantly keep track of
their position relative to an arbitrary frame of reference. That sort
of thinking was great back in the old days when technologists were
building inertial-guidance missiles and auto-pilot aircraft.
      However, this little creature bouncing around on the screen in
front of you can sense its position by picking up cues from objects in
its playpen and from the border figure itsek. An ALPHA-II is a bit
too elementary to do anything significant with the sensory informa¬
tion of that type, but the direction for further research and de¬
velopment is quite clear.
      The flowchart for this program is shown in Fig. 8-3. With the
exception of two additional program steps, DRAW FIGS and
PRINT SENSE, it is identical to the basic ALPHA-II flow-chart in
Fig. 8-1. Of course, the purpose of the PRINT SENSE step is to
print the image of the object the creature encounters in the upper
left-hand comer of the screen. DRAW FIGS draws the figures
themselves.
      This program is loaded around the ALPHA-II CONVERSION
DEMO program described in the first part of this chapter. First
load the program from cassette tape and then make the following
additions and revisions:
10 REM ** ALPHA-II MASTER 3 **
 15CLS:GOSUB500:GOSUB550:GOSUB675:GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN30
25 PRINT(a0,CHR$(CO):GOSUB450:GOSUB650:l=RI-3:J=RJ-3GOSUB
   725:IFC 0 <>32 THEN 25
30 GOSUB400:GOTO20
500 REM ** HEAD 11-3 **
5O5CLS;PRINTTAB(25)“ALPHA-H”:PRINTTAB(20)‘‘WITH SENSE PRINT”
510FORL= 1T08;PRINT:NEXT:INPUT‘‘DO‘ENTERTO START ”;S$;
    CLSiRETURN
675 REM ** FIGS 11-1
677 P=15755
680 FORF=0 T01 :FORN=P-H64*FTOP-h64*F-l-8:POKEN,35:NEXTN,F
682 FORF=0 T01 :FORN=P-l-32-f64*FTOP-h40-h64*F:POKEN,48:NEXTN,F
684 FORF=0 T01 :FORN=P-l-192-h64*F:POKEN,42:NEXTN,F
686 FORF-l-0 T01 :FORN=P-h224-f-64*FTOP-h232-H64*F:POKEN,37:
    NEXTN,F
690 RETURN


128


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====

Doublecheck your modifications against the composite listing at
the end of this chapter and save it on cassette tape before attempt -
ing to run it.
ALPHA-II WITH SENSE RESPONSE
      The previous program illustrates the way in which an ALPHA
creature can sense the quality of any obstacle in its path. In the
program, however, the creature’s responses are identical to every
kind of object. It is possible to make a more convincing case for
Level-II activity by allowing the creature to make different re¬
sponses to different kinds of figures on the screen. The previous
project shows how a simple ALPHA creature can have an extended
sensory-input mechanism, and now you will see how it can exhibit
an extended response output.
      The system senses the quality of the various objects in a
fashion identical to the previous program. In fact, the screen format
is the same. The main difference is that this program includes a
subroutine 900 which specifies the responses the creature is to
make.
      Actually, the notion of programming what the robot is sup¬
posed to do violates the basic principles set forth in Chapter 1.
However, the point of the program is to demonstrate the creature’s
ability to distinguish objects of different kinds and set off an approp¬
riate set of responses. All we are doing here is showing quite
clearly that the creature is capable of originating a sequence of
responses. A truly significant family of responses, in this case, can
come only from a Level-III mechanism.
Loading ALPHA-II with Sense Responses
     Load this program in and around ALPHA-II WITH SENSE
PRINT described in the previous section. Doing so you will be
able to use the following subroutines without any modifications:
S.400 MOVE (MOVE IM)
S.450 BLINK (BLINK 11-1)'
S.550DRAW FIELD (FIELD il-1)
S.600 INITIALIZE (INITIAL 11-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW 11-1)
S.675 DRAW FIGS (FIGS 11-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE 11-1)
Next revise the master program and S.500 HEADING to:
10 REM ♦♦ ALPHA-II MASTER 4 **
15 CLS:GOSUB500;GOSUB675 :GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=3THEN30
22 GOSUB900
25 GOSUB450;GOSUB650:I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO<>32THEN25
30 GOSUB400:GOTO20
500 REM** HEAD 11-4**

                                                                    129


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====

505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“ALPHA-ir’:PRINTTAB(18)“WITH         SENSE RE¬
   SPONSES”
510 F0RL = 1T08;PRINT;NEXT:INPUT‘‘D0         ENTERTO START”;
   S$:CLS;RETURN
The purpose of the program is lost, however, if it isn’t given
something to do in response to sensing the various objects on
the screen. Here is the response subroutine which has to be
added:
900 REM ** SENSE RESP 11-1 **
905 FORN = 0TO40 :PRINT@N,‘‘ ”:NEXT:PRINT@ 0 ,CHR$(CO)
91OIFCO=131ORCO=176OORCO=191PRINT@10‘‘OOF —A WALL!”
915 IFCO=35OORCO=37PRINT@10,“OUCH — THAT HURTS!”
920IFCO=:42THEN935
925 IFCO=48THEN940
930 RETURN
935PRINT@10,‘‘OH, BOY — FUZZY THINGS”;FORTD=1TO250:
   GOSUB450:NEXT;RETURN
940PRINT 10,”UMM, COOKIES!!”:FORTD=1TO1000:NEXT;GOSUB400:
    RETURN
 Run the program for a while and have some fun watching the
 creature at work and noting its comments written across the top
 of the border figure. Sure, it’s all a bit of silliness, but there is
 some potential for significant work.
Some Hints About the Future of ALPHA-II
      What’s the future of this? What if S.900 RESPONSES is
rewritten to do something besides evaluate the nature of the
contact situation and spell out cute little comments? What if,
instead of printing comments, the system called a totally diffe¬
rent ALPHA function, one that would establish a machine-
determined response or set of responses? Indeed, it is possible
to pile a number of intelligent functions into the RESPONSES
subroutine, thereby giving the creature a wealth of self-
determined responses to the various sensory conditions.
      Unfortunately, this all adds up to Level-Ill work, and
Level-III work is beyond the scope of this present book. It
doesn’t mean you are forbidden to try it, though. If you think you
are prepared to handle the job, give it a shot. Make up some
Alpha-Class modes of behavior to work from this sort of RE¬
SPONSE subroutine. Provide something more than 24 possible
motion codes, and you’re in the Level-III business.
GETTING TWO CRIHERS ONTO THE SCREEN AT ONE TIME
      The fact that ALPHA-II creatures are able to sense a wide
variety of different objects on the screen brings up the intriguing
possibility of putting more than one creature onto the screen at
the same time. The program featured in this section shows how
this can be done.

130


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====

Fig. 8-3. Flowchart for ALPHA-II   Fig. 8-4. Flowchart for ALPHA-II
MULTIPLE SENSE PRINTING.           WITH DUAL CREATURES.

Flowchart For ALPHA-II With Dual Creatures
     Figure 8-4 is the flowchart for this two-creature program. It
starts out in the usual fashion, doing things such as a HEADING,
drawing the playing field, and initializing the positions and first
motion codes for the two creatures.
     Since the scheme is being carried out on a single computer
system, the two creatures must be time multiplexed. That is to
say, the two creatures share much of the program, but operate in
turn. The SWITCH CREATURE block is thus an important part
of this program; it switches the program treatment back and
forth between the two creatures.

                                                               131


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====

      The two creatures in this instance are named R and B. In
fact, they look exactly like those two alphabetical characters.
The choice of names is wholly arbitrary, of course. I selected R
and B because they are the first letters in the names of my two
earlier robot machines, Rodney and Buster.

     In any event, one of the two creatures is selected by the
SWITCH CREATURE step. The B CREATURE conditional
then determines which one of the two creatures is being treated
at the moment. If it happens to be the B creature, the B
CREATURE conditional is satisfied and ENCODE B CREA¬
TURE is called. If, on the. other hand, SWITCH CREATURE
shows it is R’s turn, B CREATURE is not satisfied and the
system does an ENCODE R CREATURE.
      The two encoding steps convert the relevant parameters for
the creatures into a form that can be handled by the main
program. For instance, II, Jl, and Ml represent the I, J, and NP
(motion code and screen position) for the B creature. Whenever
the B creature is not being handled by the program, those
parameters are saved in memory. The ENCODE B CREATURE
operation translates II into I, Jl into J, and Ml into NP. After
that, the B creature is treated, through one entire motion cycle,
as though it is the only creature on the screen. At the conclusion
of B’s turn, after the MOVE step, the new values of I, J, and NP
are converted by DECODE B CREATURE into II, Jl and Ml.
      After the DECODE B CREATURE operation, the creatures
are switched at SWITCH CREATURE, and R’s parameters (12,
J2 and M2) are equated with I, J and NP. Then it is R’s turn to
run through a motion sequence. You’ll be able to see the
alternating treatment on the screen—the system isn’t fast
enough to mask it. You will see B move, then B, then R, etc.
Whenever one of them gets tangled up at the border, the other
figure remains motionless until the affected creature gets out of
its predicament.
     In this particular program, the sensory discrimination is
limited to sensing the border figure and the other creature. A
message at the top left-hand comer of the screen indicates a
contact between the two creatures. It shows which creature is
responsible for the contact between them, and you can make a
game for two players out of it if you wish. Just bet on which
creature will be responsible for hitting the other more times
within a given period of time.

132


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====

Loading ALPHA-II With Dual Creatures
    This program is loaded using ALPHA-II CONVERSION
DEMO as a starting point. Load the program into your computer
and modify it by making the following changes and additions:
 10 ** ALPHA-II MASTER 5 **
 15 CLS:GOSUB500:GOSUB550:GOSUB6
 20 MX=MX*-1:IFMX<0THEN30
 25 1=11 :J=J1 :NP=M1 :GOTO40
 30 I=I2:J=J2:NP=M2
 40 GOSUB726:IFCO=32THEN55
 45 GOSUB900
 50 GOSUB650:I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO<>32THEN50
 55 GOSUB400
 60 IFMX< 0THEN70                 900 REM ** SENSE RESP11-2 *♦
 65 II =|;Ji =J:M1 =NP:GOTO20     905 IFCO=131 ORCO=1760ORCO
 70 I1=I:J2=J:M2=NP:GOTO20            =191 RETURN
400 REM *♦ MOVE 11-3 ♦*          910 IFMX<0THEN920
405 POKENP,32:NP=NP-l-l+64*J     915 PRINT@0,“RHITB”;RETURN
410 IFMX<0THEN420                920 PRINT@^^,“B HIT R”:RETURN
415 POKENP,82:RETURN
420 POKENP,66:RETURN
500 REM •* HEAD 11-5 **
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“ALPHA-ir’:PRINTTAB(18)“WITH DUAL CREA¬
    TURES”
510 F0RL=1T08:PRINT;NEXT:INPUT:D0 ‘ENTER’TO START”;S$:
    CLS:RETURN
600 REM •♦INITIAL 11-2 **
605 MX=-1 :SF=0:M1 =15964: M2=15972
610 GOSUB650:l1=RI-3:J1=RJ-3:GOSUB650:l2=RI-3:J2=RJ-3
615 RETURN
 Doublecheck your listing against the composite version at the
end of this chapter before loading it onto cassette tape and
running it.
      When you run the program, you will find that the creature’s
move in a relatively sluggish manner. This, of course, is an
effect created by the multiplexing character of the program. If
you were to put three different creatures into this format, the
operations would be distressingly slow. The program is pre¬
sented, however, to show that it is possible to work with more
than one creature at the same time. Better schemes already in
the works use separate microprocessors for each of the crea¬
tures, and that allows any number of creatures to interact on the
screen without any noticeable time-sharing effect. What evolves
in that case is a little community of intelligent creatures. It is
left to you to carry the implication to its logical conclusion.
ALPHA-II COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS
10 REh    ALPHA-II MASTER        20 G0SUB725JIFC0«32THEN30
   1 **                          25 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:I=RI-3:
15 CLS:G0SUB500:G0SUB550:      j=rj-3jc0SUB725:IFC0<>
   GOSUB600                          32THEN25

                                                              133


===== PDF PAGE 136 =====

30 GOSUB400:GOT020

400 REM *t MOVE ll-l

405 POKENP»32:NP=NP+I+64»J:P0KENP »140 tRETURN

450 REM ** BLINK II-l **

455 P0KENPf32:P0KENP»140;RETURN

500 REM ** HEAD Il-l

505 CLS;PRINTTAB(25)"ALPHA’-II“:PRINTTAB(20 )‘’CONVERSION DEMO-

     :F0RL*1T081PRIHTJ
next:input*’do 'enters to start-»s$:cls:return

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:POKEF f1761 NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64JPOKEF»191tNEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64tPOKEF»191JNEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL II-l **

605 SF=0:NP=15968;GOSUB650:i=RI-3:J=RJ-3tRETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW II-l **

 655 RI=RND< 5 ):RJ=RND( 5):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

 725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

 730 FORSI:=ABS( I )T01STEP-1 :F0RSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

 735 CO=PEEK< NP+SI)!<SGN( I )+64*SJ*SGN< J ) )

 740 IFC0O32RETURN

 745 nextsj,si:return

Alpha-ll With Track Sense Option Listing

10 REM t*. ALPHA-11 MASTER 2 *»
15 CLSIGOSUB500:G0SUB550:GOSUB600

20 G0SUB725:iFCQ=320R( CO=s42ANDTS=0 )THEN30

25 GOSUB450IGOSUB650:I=RI-31J=RJ-3:G0SUB725IIFNOT
    (C0-320R(C0=42ANDTS=0 ) )THEN2
5

30 GOSUB400:GOT020


134


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====

400 REM ♦* move II-2

405 P0KENPf42:NP=NP+I+64»J:P0KENPr 140’.RETURN

450 REM *# BLINK II-l **

455 P0KENP»32:P0KENPf140;RETURN

500 REM      HEAD II-2

505 CLSiPRINTTAB(25)"ALPHA-II";PRINTTAB(20)"TRACK SENSE OPTION"

510 PRINTtPRINT’.PRINT"WANT CREATURE TO BE SENSITIVE
    TO TRACKS";PRINTTAB(10 )"0
 - NO"’.PRINTTAB( 10 )"1 - YES": INPUTTS

515 CLS:ONTS+1GOT0520»525

520 PRINTe960r"NOT SENSITIVE TO OWN TRACKS":RETURN

525 PRINTe960»"SENSITIVE TO OWN TRACKS"tRETURN

550 REM      FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131INEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEFt191:NEXT

570 FQRF=15615T016255STEP64tPOKEF»191INEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL II-l **

605 SF=0:NP=15968:GOSUB650:I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:RETURN

650 REM 4* FETCH NEW II-l *)K

655 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5 ):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

730 F0RSI==AB3( I )TG1STEP-11FORSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1
735 CO^PEEK( NP+SDKSGNC I )+64*SJ*SGN< J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 nextsj»si:return

Alpha-ll With Multi-Sense Printing Program

10 KLM ** ALPHA-11 MASTER 3 44

15 CLS;GOSUB500IGOSUB550:G0SUB675IGOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:iFCO=32THEN30


                                                         135


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====

25 PRINieO fCHR*( CO )iGOSUB450;G0SUB650II=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSl
      JB725: IFC0O32THEN25

30 GOSUB400:GOT020

400 REM         move II-l *4

405 P0KENP»32:NP=NP+I+64*JiP0KENP»140:RETURN

450 REM         BLINK II-l **

455 POKENP»32:POKENP»140IRETURN

500 REM ** HEAD I1-3 **

505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)"ALPHA-II’’;PRINTTAB(20)“WITH SENSE
       PRINT"

510 forl=ito8:print:next:input“dq 'enter'               to start-iss:
      CLStRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=^16193T016255:P0KEF» 176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF===15615T016255STEP64 :P0KEF »191 tNEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM )«* INITIAL II-l

605 SF=0;NP=15968:GOSUB650:i=ri-3:j=rj-3:return

650 REM m FETCH NEW II-l

655 RI:^RND< 5 ):R.J = RND( 5 ): IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM *;>{: FIGS 11-1

677 P^15755

680 FORF^^ OTOl :FGRN-P+64*FT0P+64*F + 8:pQKEN»35:NEXTNfF

682 FORF=-OTOi :FORN=^P+32 f64)KFTOP+40F64))cF:POKEN»48:NEXTN»F

684 FORF^^O T U L * FOf<N-P + 192+644FTOP + 2()() + 64*F : POKEN»42INEXTN y F

686 FORF---OT01:FORN:::=P+224 + 64*FTOP + 232+64*F:POKEN»37:NEXTN»F

690 RETURN

725 REM         CON SENSE II-l 4*

730 FORSI-ABS( I )T01STEP-11FORSJ=ABS( .J )T01STEP-1


136


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SHCSGN( I )+64*SJIcSGN( J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 nextsj»si:return

Alpha-ll With Sense Responses Listing
lO KLfi      ALPHA-11 MASTER 4 **

15 CLS;GOSUB500:GOSUB550;GOSUB675:GOSUB600

20 GOSUB725:iFCO=32THEN30

22 GOSUB900

25 G0SUB450 :G0SUB650 ; I-RI-3: J-RJ-3:G0SUB725: IFC0O32THEN
   25
30 GQSUB400iGOT020
400 REM ** MOVE II-l

405 P0KENP»32;NP=NP+IF64*j;P0KENPf140tRETURN

450 REM ** BLINK II-l **

455 POKENP»321POKENP»140;RETURN

500 REM ** HEAD II-4 **

505 CLS;PRINTTAB(25)"ALPHA-II":PRINTTAB( 18)" WITH       SENSE
    RESPONSES”
510 forl=ito8:print:next:input"do 'enter'      to   start"
    cls:return
550 REM       field II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEFrl3i:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEF>176;NEXT

565 F0RF=-15553T016255STEP64tPOKEF»191INEXT

570 F0RF=-15615T016255STEP64JPOKEF»191;NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM 4* INITIAL II-l

605 SF=^0 tNP=15968:G0SUB650:i=RI-3:J=RJ-3:RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU II-l **

655 RI==RND( 5 ):RJ=RND( 5 ): IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM       FIGS II-l **

677 P-15755

6B0 FORF-OTOl :F0RN=P+64*:FT0P+64*F+8:P0KEN»35:NEXTNfF


                                                             137


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====

6B2 FORF=^OTOi:FORN==^P + 32f64*FTOP+40+64*FtPOKEN»48lNEXTN»F

6B4 F0RF = 0T01 ;FORN=P+192+64*FTOP+20()+64*F:POKEN»42;NEXTN>F

686 FGRF^^OTOi :F0RN=-P f224 + 64*FT0P+232+64<(F:P0KEN»37:NEXTNf F
690 RETURN

725 REM          CON SENSE II-l **

730 FORSI=^ABS( I )T01STEP-1:FORSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK(NP+SI*SGN( I )+64*SJ*SGN( J ) )

740   IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJrSI:RETURN

900 REM **; SENSE RESP II-l

905 F ORN--=^0TO40 :PRINTI?N»" ” tNEXT tPRINTSO »CHR$( CO )

910 IFCO==1310RCO=1760RCO=191PRINTeiO»"OOF — A WALL!"

915 IFCO^35ORCO=37PRINT01O»"OUCH — THAT HURTS!"

920 IFC0=42THEN935

925 IFCO=^43THEN940

930 RETURN

935 PRINTeiO»"DH» BOY — FUZZY THINGS":FORTD=1T0250:G0SUB
    45o:next:return
940 pRiNT0iOr"UMM» COOKIES!!":fortd=itoiooo:next:GOSUB400
      I RETURN


Alpha-ll With Dual Creatures Program

10 REM ** ALPHA-II MASTER 5 **

15 cls:gosub50o:gosub5S0:gosub600

20 MX=MX*-i:iFMX<0THEN30

25 I=Ii:j=Ji:NP=MliGOTO40

30 I=I2:J=J2:NP=M2

40 G0SUB725:iFC0=32THEN55

45 GOSUB900

50 GOSUB650: I=RI -3: J=R J-3 J G0SUB7251IFC0032THEN50

55 GOSUB400

60 IFMX<0THEN70

65 ii=i:ji=j:mi=np:goto20


138


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====

70 12=1JJ2=J:M2=NP:GOT020

400 REM ** MOVE I1-3

405 P0KENP>32:NP=NP+I+64»J

410 IFMX<0THEN420

415 pokenp»82:return

420 P0KENP»66:RETURN

500 REM ** HEAD II-5 »♦

505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)"ALPHA-II":PRINTTAB<18)"WITH dual
    CREATURES”
510 forl=ito8:print:next:input“do        'enter'   to start-i
     s$;cls;return

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **
555 FORF=15553T015615:POKEF»131:NEXT
560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF>191:NEXT
570 f GRF^15615T016255STEP64:‘P0KEF»191;NEXT
575 RETURN
600 REM>|t;*i INITIAL ii-2 **

605 MX=-1:SF=():M1 = 15964:M2=^15972

610 GOSUB650:I1=RI-3:J1=RJ-3:G0SUB650:I2=RI-3:J2=RJ-3

615 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU II-l

655 RI=RND< 5 ):RJ=RND< 5 ):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l

730 FORSI=ABS(I )T01STEP-1:FORSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SI*SGN( I )+64)»(SJ*SGN< J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJtSI:RETURN

900 REM      SENSE RESP II-2 **

905 IFC0=1310RC0=1760RC0=191RETURN

910 IFMX<0THEN920

915 PRINTeO»"R HIT B":RETURN

920 PRINTeO»"B HIT R":RETURN


                                                                139


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====

             BETA-1 BASIC -
             The Next Big Step
 <      ►




There should be no doubt about it, Alpha creatures are fun and
instructive. And what’s even more important is the fact that they
are critical to the evolution of adaptive machine intelligence.
      If you have done all the work for the Alpha-Class projects
suggested in Chapters 3 through 8, you have learned a lot about
machine intelligence, and perhaps you’ve developed at least a
vague notion concerning all the basic groundwork that remains to
be done with those simple creatures. However, there has to be
much more to adaptive intelligence than random behavior.
Somewhere along the line it is necessary to introduce a whole
new dimension — memory.
      A Beta-Class machine still relies heavily upon elements of
Alpha behavior, and throughout the next few chapters, you’ll be
seeing bits and pieces of Alpha programs and subroutines tucked
into the Beta flowcharts and programs. The big difference is that
a Beta-Class mechanism couples Alpha-Class behavior with an
ability to remember events in the past. And of course, it not only
remembers past events, but also has the capacity to act upon
those memories at any time in the future. Generally speaking, a
Beta-Class mechanism is an Alpha creature that is coupled to a
memory scheme.
      You’ll be starting from ground zero again, but at a new
level. Fortunately, many of the subroutines you prepared in
earlier chapters can be applied directly to the Beta schemes,
thus saving you some time and tedious effort. The point is that
you’ll be starting out with the most elementary form of Beta
mechanism, gradually refining and expanding it through the next
few chapters. You are probably in for some surprises and,
hopefully, a lot of fun as well.

THE BASIC BETA-1 FLOWCHART
    All Beta-Class behavior is built upon one rather simple se¬
quence of operations. Study the flowchart in Fig. 9-1 very

140


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====

carefully. If you let things get out of hand here in the early
going, there isn’t much chance you’ll be able to understand and
appreciate some of the more interesting, but subtle, features in
later versions.
      The sequence of program operations for BETA-I BASIC
begins by allocating some space for the creature’s special mem¬
ory. That is represented by the first block on the flowchart, SET
MEMORY DIM (J/wension.) After that, the computer prints a
simple heading to identify the program and then the memory is
initialized at the block, INITIALIZE MEMORY.
      The next two steps, DRAW FIELD and INITIALIZE CRE¬
ATURE, carry over directly from your ALPHA programs, draw¬
ing the same border figure and setting the initial position and
direction of the creature. SET NEXT MOVE and CONTACT are




Fig. 9-1. Flowchart for BETA-I BASIC.




                                                             141


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====

likewise identical to ALPHA operations, but some major differ¬
ences creep into the picture after that. Suppose, however, there
is not contact, the CONTACT conditional is not satisfied. In that
case, the flowchart shows operations going down to a MOVE
block which causes the creature to move and subsequently
return to SET NEXT MOVE. So once the little creature is
underway, it runs through a nice program loop between SET
NEXT MOVE, through CONTACT and MOVE. Moving freely
across the screen, this BETA creature works just like its
simpler ALPHA counterpart.
     The differences in behavior become apparent when a con¬
tact situation occurs. Satisfying the first CONTACT conditional,
the one following SET NEXT MOVE, brings up three new kinds
of operations: SAVE I, J, READ MEMORY, and a BEFORE
conditional.
     SAVE I, J is responsible for saving the values of the motion
codes that prevail the moment contact occurs. The BETA
scheme, you see, will ultimately assign a particular response to
a given contact situation. The response will be stored as data in
the system’s memory, and the address of that data will be the
motion codes ±at exist the moment the contact situation occurs.
This sentence makes a vital point. Mark it so you can locate it
easily a bit later in this discussion.
     Once the motion codes are stored in memory, actually
assigned to other variable names, the next step is to read the
memory. What is the address of the memory data to be read?
Why, the address specified by the values of the I and J motion
codes. A contact situation that occurs while the creature is
executing a particular combination of motion codes accesses a
unique address in the creature’s memory. “I’ve run into some¬
thing while moving with a vector 1=1 and J=-2. I’ll remember
those two numbers (SAVE I,J) and then look into my memory to
see if I have ever run into something while running 1=1 and
J=“*2 before.” That’s the sort of “thinking” that goes on through
step sequence SAVE I, J, READ MEMORY, and BEFORE.
     If the creature has encountered a contact situation under the
prevailing motion codes, the BEFORE conditional is satisfied,
and the Y output of that block carries operations down to a
DECODE block. The DECODE operation is necessary here
because the motion codes stored in memory and those generated
by FETCH NEW MOVE are specified as integers between 1 and
 5. The DECODE operation merely subtracts 3 from those codes.

142


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====

adjusting the interval to the range of integers -2 through +2.
Remember the same sort of operation following every FETCH
NEW MOVE in the ALPHA programs?
     OK, so the creature has encountered a certain kind of
contact situation before. The stored response is read and de¬
coded. Then it must be checked for validity by a second CON¬
TACT conditional. If there is no contact, the creature is then
free to MOVE, SET NEXT MOVE, etc.
     Now, consider this summary of events just described. The
creature has been running along freely across the screen,
executing a series of stepwise motions determined by the cur¬
rent values of motion codes I and J. But then the creature runs
into something on the screen, satisfying the first CONTACT
conditional.
     The current values of I and J are saved and then used as the
address for a Beta-Class memory. The creature examines the
contents of the memory at that address. If it sees it has
encountered an obstacle while executing that particular motion
code before, it pulls the data from memory and decodes it. The
data in this case represents the solution to the situation — a pair
of encoded motion codes. Those previously stored motion codes
are then decoded and tried by the second CONTACT condi¬
tional. Assuming they work, they are used as motion codes for
the next series of stepwise motions across the screen.
     But what happens if the creature encounters an obstacle,
addresses its Beta-Class memory according to the current values
of I and J, reads the memory, and finds it has not encountered a
contact situation under those particular conditions? In this case,
the BEFORE conditional is not satisfied (“I haven’t done this
before.”), and the creature resorts to Alpha-type random be¬
havior.
     Following the N output from the BEFORE conditional, you
will find a rather familiar loop. The creature’s figure is blinked
on the screen by BLINK. The system fetches a new, randomly
generated set of motion codes and FETCH NEW MOVE, loading
the “solution” into the Beta-Class memory. What is the address
of that “solution?” The address where the “solution” will reside
is determined by the motion codes that exist the moment contact
occurs. At the time the creature does a LOAD MEMORY,
however, it does not know whether or not the solution is a good
one. This last sentence is another one of those very important
ones. Mark it for future reference.


                                                              143


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====

     At any rate, the system picks a random motion code, stores
it in encoded form in the memory, and then decodes it at
DECODE before actually trying it. Tlie “solution” is then tried
by the second CONTACT conditional. If the “solution” works,
CONTACT will not be satisfied and the system goes to MOVE
to get the creature moving across the screen again. Naturally,
the current motion code is different from the one that existed the
moment the originating CONTACT conditional was satisfied.
     Here’s the situation in capsule form. The creature is moving
freely across the screen, executing a series of stepwise motions
determined by some values of I and J. It encounters an obstacle
and uses the current values of I and J as an address for the
Beta-Class memory. The system looks at the contents of the
memory and sees it has not encountered an obstacle under those
conditions of I and J motions before. It responds by picking a
randomly generated set of encoded motion codes, and before
testing to see whether or not they will clear the contact condi¬
tion, the new codes are loaded in memory, thereafter serving as
a tentative response to the same sort of contact situation in the
future.
     The new motion code is then decoded and tested. Since we
have assumed in the foregoing discussion that the new codes
work, the creature pulls away from the contact situation and
begins moving across the screen under the control of the new
values of I and J. Remember that these new values of I and J are
also stored in Beta-Class memory now. So whenever the crea¬
ture contacts an obstacle under the same conditions at a later
time, the solution is immediately at hand, and there will be no
need to resort to a random fetching operation.
      There is still one more loop in Fig. 9-1 to consider, the one
coming from the Y output of the second CONTACT conditional,
going through a BLINK operation, and up to FETCH NEW
MOVE. This loop is executed under two different conditions:
when a newly selected and randomly generated response doesn’t
work, and when, for some reason, a previously successful
response doesn’t work.
      Suppose, for instance, that the creature bumps into a con¬
tact situation it hasn’t dealt with before. The BEFORE condi¬
tional is not satisfied and the system resorts to the FETCH
NEW MOVE loop. The new move is loaded into memory,
decoded, and tried at the second CONTACT conditional. This
time assume the new motion code doesn’t work — the second
CONTACT conditional is satisfied. In that case, the system

144


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====

picks a new random code, loads it into memory, and tries it. The
system continues looping around here until it happens across a
motion code that does work, and each time it picks a different
code, it replaces the old one in memory. The motion code that
remains in the memory is the one that works.
      Taking a longer view of this BASIC BETA-I program
flowchart, you should be able to see that the Beta-Class memory
is first wiped clean. The creature begins its life knowing abso¬
lutely nothing about how to respond to contact situations. Each
contact situation causes the mechanism to check the contents of
its memory, at an address determined by the motion code
prevailing the moment the contact occurs.
      In the early going, none of the memory locations contain
any solutions to the contact situation, so the creature must
resort to Alpha-like behavior—picking a new motion code at
random. When it comes across a motion code that works, it is
saved in memory for future reference.
      As the creature gains experience with its environment,
running into obstacles under a variety of different motion codes,
the memory of successful solutions grows and the need to resort
to Alpha-type behavior lessens. In principle, at least, the crea¬
ture eventually reaches a level of experience whereby it has a
successful code stored in memory for every possible sort of
contact situation. This is an ideal case that is rarely, if ever,
achieved in practice.
      You can see this memory developing by watching the
creature’s behavior. When the program is first started, the
critter flounders around just like an Alpha creature. But given
some experience with its environment, you will note the re¬
sponses taking on a more rational character. In fact, you will find
the creature trying to lock in on a certain pattern of motions.
There is more to be said about this kind of observable behavior
in the next section of this chapter.
      Now, if you have been studying the flowchart in Fig. 9-1
with sufficient care, you might be wondering why previously
successful, stored responses are checked for validity. You might
ask, “If a given response was successful before, why wouldn’t it
be successful under the same conditions in the future?”
      Indeed, a previously successful and remembered response
is checked before it is “approved” and used again. After the
READ MEMORY block in Fig. 9-1, the system questions, “Have
I done this before?” If the answer is “yes,” the implication is

                                                               145


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====

^ that a successful motion code resides in memory. It is decoded
  and then tested by the second CONTACT conditional. Why test
  a previously successful response? Why not loop directly from
  DECODE to MOVE?
       The successful responses stored in the Beta-Class memory
  refer only to the IJ motion codes that prompted those responses
  in the first place. There is no reference at all to the geometry of
  the environment. A motion code that happens to get the creature
  away from a contact situation at one place in the environment’s
  geometry might not work at all at some other place. Fortunately,
  most contact situations can be solved by more than one motion
  code. There will always be at least one motion code that is
  better than the others—one that gets the creature away from the
  largest percentage of contact situations.
       So even though one particular code works under one set of
  conditions, it might not work (even if the I and J motions are the
  same) under a different set of environmental conditions. If you
  were to bypass the doublechecking feature, there’s a very good
  chance the creature would find a contact situation specifying the
  same memory address, but calling for a different solution than
  the one residing in memory.
       The Beta creature must be allowed to change its mind. By
  allowing this to happen, it eventually comes up with the best
  respond. This is adaptive behavior in one of its clearest forms. It
  sets this sort of machine apart from traditional robot, or parabot,
  thinking.
       Carrying this mind-changing, response-optimizing notion to
  an extreme, suppose the Beta memory isn’t systematically
  cleared at the beginning of the program. Instead, the IN¬
  ITIALIZE MEMORY step loads the creature’s memory with a
  whole lot of random garbage; it can be anything, really.
       In this case, the poor creature is beginning its life with a
  bunch of screwed-up notions about how to deal with the world
  around it. Maybe it’s like some people you know. A Beta
  machine, however, owes no special allegiance to its precon¬
  ceived ideas about how to deal with the world.
       It will try the garbage responses, but that garbage is
  gradually replaced with responses that actually work in practice.
  The garbage initially fed into the memory gets worked out by
  the very nature of Beta-Class behavior.
       Imagine, a machine that cleans up its own act as it goes
  along. If that doesn’t smack of real robotics, I don’t know what
  does.

 146


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====

WHAT TO EXPECT FROM RUNNING BETA-1 BASIC
      There is no need to show you a diagram of the screen for
BETA-I BASIC—it looks exactly like that of ALPHA-I BASIC.
It’s simply a rectangular border that encloses the little blinking
figure of the creature.
      When you first run this program, you will see the creature
starting from its initial position near the upper left-hand comer
of its “playpen.” It moves downward and to the right, executing
an 1=1, J=1 motion code. Under these circumstances, the first
border contact will be at the bottom of the border figure. The
critter’s memory is blank at that moment, so it picks a random
response (a new I, J motion code) and goes on from there.
    ' The BETA creature will appear to run just like its ALPHA
counterpart for a while. After about 20 to 30 contacts, however,
you will be able to see that BETA is locking into a certain
pattern of motions. The pattern might be a very simple one and
thus rather easy to detect. But on the other hand, the pattern
might be exceedingly complex and difficult to follow. In any
event, BASIC BETA-I will eventually establish a pattern of
motion that is peculiar to that one creature. You will probably
never see another BETA pick the same pattern. The pattern
represents that creature’s solution to dealing with the environ¬
ment. In its own terms, it finds a way to move about most
effectively.
      In a later chapter you will find some ways to upset the
pattern and observe the creature’s ability to adapt to the situa¬
tion by establishing a new one. At this point, however, your job
is to see BETA find and lock into its own pattern of motions. It
will run that pattern indefinitely. Look for that pattern—that’s
the important thing here. It’s a lot of fun, too. When you get
tired of watching the critter showing off its intelligent solution,
do a BREAK and RUN the program again.
LOADING BASIC BETA-I
     A number of the subroutines specified for this program
carry over from BASIC ALPHA-I described in Chapter 3. So
load that program from cassette tape before making the modifica¬
tions and additions specified here.
     Here are the subroutines from BASIC ALPHA-I that can be
used without any modifications:
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-1)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)

                                                               147


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====

     Throughout the ALPHA projects, you wrote BLINK opera¬
tions into the master program at every point where the crea¬
ture’s figure was to blink and move on the screen. To avoid
having to write that long statement line over and over again,
create this small subroutine:

450 REM *♦ BLINK-1 **
455 SET(X,Y) :SET(X+1,Y): RESET(X,Y): RESET(X+1,Y)
460 RETURN

         Variables introduced: None
         Variables required at start: none

This will be called S.450 BLINK from now on.
     Then, of course, the HEADING has to be rewritten to
reflect the fact that the program is dealing with a Beta-Class
system.

500 REM *♦ B HEADING-1 **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB(25)“RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB(25)“BASIC VERSION”
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT‘‘DO ENTER TO START”;S$:RETURN

         Variables introduced: L, S$
         Variables required at start: none

Test routine

1 GOSUB500
2 CLS:PRINT‘‘OK”:INPUTX$;GOT01
     That takes care of the subroutines for BASIC BETA-I.
There is no need for special discussions since they are quite
similar or identical to ground you have covered before. The
master program, however, calls for some special consideration.
     Although BETA-I BASIC MASTER is similar in many
respects to the master program for BASIC ALPHA-1, you will
be better off entering it from scratch. Remember to delete line
numbers not specified in this program.

 10 REM ♦♦ BETA-I BASIC MASTER **
 15 DIMM(5,5,2)
 20 GOSUB500
 22CLS:F0RN=1T05:F0RM=1T05:F0RD=1T02:M(M,N,0)=3;NEXT:
    NEXT:NEXT
25 CLS:GOSUB550
30 GOSUB600

148


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====

35 X=X’+l:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
4OIFCO=0THEN70
45 MI=l4-3:MJ=J+3
50 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
55 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN80
60 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
65IFCO=1THEN95
70 GOSUB450
75 G0T035
80 GOSUB450
85 GOSUB650
9OM(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ:GOTO60
95 GOSUB450:GOTO85

     The first thing of special note is that the Beta memory is
specified as a 3-dimensional array. See the DIM statement in
line 15. The array is identified as subscripted variable M, a
convention used throughout the BETA work. The first two
elements of the array, dimensioned to 5 elements each, repre¬
sent the address components for I and J respectively. The third
element, dimensioned at 2 places, holds the “solution”—the
contents of the memory. Tliere are thus 25 Beta memory
locations, one for each of the possible combinations of I and J
addresses. Each of the 25 memory locations holds two items of
information: an I component and a J component for the suggested
solution.
     Line 15 dimensions this Beta memory space, while line 20
presents the HEADING for the program. After executing the
HEADING operation, line 22 is the one that initializes the Beta
memory. You’ll see that all line 22 does is to run through all 25
memory locations, loading a pair of threes into each one. Recall
that an encoded 3 represents a no-motion condition. When
decoded, a 3 becomes a 0. So line 22 actually loads the memory
with stop codes.
     Line 25 clears the HEADING from the screen and calls
subroutine 550 to draw the border figure. Line 30 initializes the
position and motion of the creature, and line 35 represents the
SET NEXT MOVE operation in Fig. 9-1.
     The statements are then strictly ALPHA-like down to line
45. In line 45, the current values of I and J are encoded and
saved as variables MI and MJ respectively. This is the SAVE I,J
operation shown on the flowchart in Fig. 9-1.
     In line 50, variables RI and RJ, the same two variables
ALPHA uses for encoded information from a random-fetching
operation, are picked from the Beta memory. RI, for instance, is
picked ifrom address MI,MJ,1. This represents the first of two

                                                             149


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====

elements stored as data in address location ]V[I,]VIJ. And from
line 45, you can see that those address components represent
the current motion codes. Element RJ is picked in a similar
fashion, but it is the second element in that address location.
      Line 55 represents the BEFORE conditional. During the
initializing process, the memory was loaded with threes. Line 55
is satisfied if RI and RJ are both equal to 3, indicating the system
has not responded to this particular situation before. (The
system will never select a pair of threes for a response because
that represents a stop code, and stop codes are not permitted).
      Assuming for the moment that line 55 does not turn up a
pair of threes, the motion code read from the Beta memory at
line 50 is decoded and tested by line 60 which performs the job
of the DECODE and second CONTACT operations in Fig. 9-1.
      After that, the operations follow the flowchart in a rather
straightforward fashion. The only line calling for more explana¬
tion is line 90. Line 90 is the LOAD MEMORY operation. Here
the values of RI and RJ are written into their respective places in
the Beta memory. Note that the address elements are the same
ones established up in line 45. So whatever the solution to the
contact situation might be (as represented by RI and RJ), it is
written into Beta memory at an address dictated by the motion
code prevailing the moment the original contact occurred.

BETA-1 BASIC WITH SCORING
     The creature created by BETA-I BASIC inevitably estab¬
lishes a habit pattern of motion, and it might be at least
intuitively apparent that the creature’s scoring rises well above
the chance level once that pattern is established.
     The program described here simply provides the scoring
figures on the display: NO. CONTACTS, NO. GOOD MOVES,
and SCORE. These parameters are identical to those described
for ALPHA-I WITH SCORING in Chapter 4. In fact, you can use
that program as a starting point for building this one. The screen
format is identical to the ALPHA version in Fig. 4-1.
     The flowchart for BETA-I BASIC WITH SCORING is
shown in Fig. 9-2. It is simply the BETA-I BASIC flowchart
(Fig. 9-1) with the scoring operations from Chapter 4 fit into the
appropriate places. Since you have already covered this territory
before, there is little to be said about it.
     The simplest way to get the program loaded is to first enter
ALPHA-I WITH SCORING from your cassette tape machine.
Then modify S.500 HEADING to read like this:

150


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====

500 REM ** BETA HEADING-2 *♦
605 CLS
510 PRINTTAB(25)‘‘RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB(20)“BASIC VERSION WITH SCORING”
620 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT‘‘DO ENTER TO START”;S$:RETURN

          Variables introduced: L, S$
          Variables required at start: none
Test routine
1 GOSUB500
2 CLS:PRINr‘OK”:INPUTX$:GOT01

Next, add S. 450 BLINK as described earlier in ±is chapter.
And finally, add the following master program for BETA-I
BASIC WITH SCORING:




Fig. 9-2. Flowchart for BETA-1 BASIC
WITH SCORING.




                                                        151


===== PDF PAGE 154 =====

10 REM *♦ BETA-I BASIC SCORE MASTER **
15DIMM(5,5,2)
17GOSUB500
20FORO=1TO2:FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:M(M,N,O)=3:NEXT:NEXT:NEXT
25 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
30 X=X+l:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
35 IFCO=0THEN75
40C=C-f1 :GOSUB800:GOSUB450
45 MI=l+3:MJ=J+3
50 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
55 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN80
60 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
65IFCO=1THEN90
70 D=D+1 :GOSUB800
75 GOSUB450:GOTO30
80 GOSUB450:GOSUB650
85 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ:GOTO60
90 C=C+1 :GOSUB800:GOTO80
      Doublecheck your listing against the composite listing for
BETA-I WITH SCORING at the end of this chapter. Then run it.
You will see normal Alpha-Class scoring at first. The score will
run very high or very low through the first few contacts and then
begin settling down to something on the order of .48 through the
first 20 contacts or so. This is typical ALPHA behavior.
      Soon, though, the BETA creature finds its habit pattern,
making fewer and fewer wrong moves. The NO. GOOD MOVES
figure begins incrementing right along with NO. CONTACTS,
and the SCORE figure rises slowly, but steadily, upward through
the ALPHA scoring range. If you have become good at spotting
the BETA habit pattern, you will note the rise in scoring as soon
as you see that pattern being executed. The score simply keeps
on rising toward perfection.
      The score will never quite reach 1.00 because of the errors
made in the early part of the run, but it rises asymptotically and
far above the levels possible with an ALPHA creature. You can
plainly observe the vast difference in intellectual potential en¬
gendered by a simple adaptive memory system.
      Compare the ALPHA and BETA programs. The only differ¬
ences are those related to the memory included in the BETA
versions. Your present creature is essentially Alpha-like at first,
but the Alpha characteristics gradually give way to more Beta¬
like behavior—a learning curve that rises toward perfection. You
should note that the BETA behavior begins to dominate after 20
to 30 contacts.
BETA-I BASIC WITH SCORING AND SHOWING MEMORY
    One of the distinct advantages of simulating robot intelli¬
gence on a computer, as opposed to building a working machine.

152


===== PDF PAGE 155 =====

is the ease with which the programming can be modified and
extended. One of the truly intriguing aspects of BETA-I, as
presented on the screen is the ability to observe the action of
the memory on a first-hand basis. This little wrinkle can be
added to the previous scoring program with little extra effort.
     The SHOW MEMORY version works exactly like BETA-I
BASIC WITH SCORING. The display is modified, however, to
show the status of the Beta memory at any given moment. In
this case, the status of the memory is displayed as little spots of
light along the bottom of the display screen, each spot having a
shape related to the binary value of the information stored there.
     There is no need to go into a long dissertation concerning
ways to interpret the spots. They can be interpreted, but it is
interesting enough just to watch the creature’s memory map
change in a dynamic fashion as it gains experience with the
environment. Once the creature settles into a habit pattern of
motion on the screen, you will note that the memory map no
longer shows any changes.
     So the first thing you should do is save BETA-I BASIC
WITH SCORING on cassette tape. Then make the following
revisions and additions to the subroutines. Rewrite S.500
HEADING as follows:
500 REM ** BETA-I MEM HEAD **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB(25)“RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB(15)“SCORING VERSION WITH SHOW MEMORY”
520 FORL=0TO10:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”;S$:RETURN

Then revise S.550 DRAW FIELD. This revision of the standard
border figure shortens it a bit from the bottom, thus leaving
room for the row of lights representing the Beta memory map.
550 REM ** FIELD-2 **
552 FI =15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255
555 FORF=F1TOF2:POKEF,131:NEXT
560 FORF=F3TOF4:POKEF,176:NEXT
565 FORF=F1TOF4STEP64:POKEF,191 :NEXT
570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64;POKEF,191 ;NEXT
575 RETURN

    The following list of subroutines then carry over without
changes from BETA-I BASIC WITH SCORING:
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.800 UPDATE DISPLAY (UD SCORE-1)
S.450 BLINK (BLINK-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)

                                                               153


===== PDF PAGE 156 =====

Of course, there has to be a subroutine for displaying the Beta
memory map along the bottom of the screen. This is a new one,
so it has to be entered from scratch:

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1 **
1010W=16327
1015FORM=1TO5;FORN=1TO5:FORO=1TO2
1020 P0KEW,127+M(M,N,0)
1025 W=W-1-1 :NEXT:NEXT:NEXT
1030 RETURN

     What about a master program for BETA-I BASIC WITH
SCORING AND SHOWING MEMORY? That’s a simple matter,
too. All you have to do is revise line 10 and 85 as follows:

10REM ♦♦ BETA-I MEM/SCO-1
85M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ.2)=RJ:GOSUB1000:GOTO60

Check your listing against the composite listing, and you’re
ready to watch that Beta memory map at work. It’s something
else!

COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS

BETA-I BASIC Composite Listing
10 REM      BETA-I BASIC MASTER *♦

15 DIMM(5»5»2)
20 GOSUB500

22 foro=ito2:forn=ito5:form=ito5JM(MfNfO)==3jnext:NEXT:mext

25 CLS:G0SUB550

30 GOSUB600

35 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

40 IFCO=0THEN70

45 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3

50 RI=M( m»MJ»l ):RJ=M(MI»MJf2 )

55 IF(RI=3)AND<RJ=3)=-1THEN80

60 I=RI-3:.J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

65 IFC0=1THEN95

70 GOSUB450

75 G0T035


154


===== PDF PAGE 157 =====

80 GQSUB450

85 G0SUB650

90             )=Ri:M(MIrM.J»2 )=RJ:GOT060

95 GOSUB450:GOT085

450 REM t* BLINK-1 t*

455 SET(X»Y ):SET< X+1»Y ) JRESEK XrY ):RESET( X+lfY )

460 RETURN

500 REM «c* B HEADING-1

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25)"RODNEY BETA-i"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(25)"BASIC VERSION"

520 forl=otoio:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"rS$tRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383

555 FORF=FlTOF2:POKEFrl3i:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF=FlT0F4STEP64:P0KEFf191:NEXT

570 forf=f2TOF4Step64:pokeff191:next

575 RETURN

600 REM t* INITIAL-1 **

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1

660 RI=RND(5);RJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM       CON SENSE-1 »♦

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J )

735 IFPOINT< X+SGN<I )»XPfY+SGN(J )*YP )a-lTHEN750

740 NEXTINEXT


                                                         155


===== PDF PAGE 158 =====

745 co=o:return

750 CO=i:RETURN

BETA-1 BASIC With Scoring
iO REM 4)f   BETA-i BASIC SCORE MASTER

15 DIMM( 5T5f2 :»

17 COSUBSOO

20 FOR0=lTO2:rORN--^lT05:FCRM=lTO5:M^. MfN»G )=3iNEXT :NEXl tNEXT

25 CLS:G0SUB550:G0SUB600

30 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

35 IFC0=0THEN75

40 C=C+1:GOSU6800:GOSUB450

45 MI:^I+3:MJ=-J+3

50 RI=M( MlrMJrl )*RJ=M< MItMJ»2 )

55 IF(RI = 3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN80

60 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

65 IFC0=1THEN90

70 D=D+1:GOSUB800

75 GOSUB450:GOT030

80 GOSUB450:GOSUB650

85 M(MIrM.Jfl )=Ri:M(MI»MJf2)=RJ{G0T060

90 C=C+1:GOSUB800:GOT080

450 REM       BLINK-1

455 SET( XrY ):SET(X+1»Y ):RESET(XrY ):RESET( X+1»Y )

460 RETURN

500 REM ** BETA HEADING-2 **

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25 )"RODNEY BETA-i”tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(20 )"BASIC VERSION WITH SCORING-

520 forl=otoio:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"fS$:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 *t


156


===== PDF PAGE 159 =====

5fj2 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321 :F4=16383

S55 F0RF=F1T0F2IPOKEF f131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFt176:NEXT

565 FORF=:F 1T0F4STEP64: POKEF f 191: NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEFrl9i:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-2

610   x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i
615 0=0:D=0

620 RETURN

650 REM       FETCH NEU-1 **

660 RI=RND( 5 ):R.J=RND( 5 )

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J )

735 IFP0INT(X+SGN(I )*XP?Y+SGN(J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:next

745 co=o:return

750 co=i:return

800 REM ** UD score-1 t*

805

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTei5T"N0. CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35f"NO* GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55T"SCORE"

855 PRINT(337rC:PRINT(?l()8»D

860 PRINTeil9TUSINGU$?E

865 RETURN
BETA-1 BASIC WITH SCORE AND SHOW MEM Listing
10 REM       BETA-I MEM/SCO-1

15 DIMM(5»5»2)

                                                    157


===== PDF PAGE 160 =====

17 GOSUB500

20 FOR0=lTO2:FORN=lT05:F0RM=lTO5:M(HfN»0)=3:NEXT:NEXT:NEXT

25 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600

30 X=X+I:Y=Y+J;G0SUB725

35 IFC0=0THEN75

40 C=C+1:GOSUB800:GOSUB450

45 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3

50 RI=M(MI»MJ»1 ):RJ=h(MI»MJf2)

55 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3>=-1THEN80

60 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

65 IFC0=1THEN90

70 D=D+1:G0SUB800

75 GOSUB450:GOT030

80 GOSUB450:GOSUB650

85            )=RI:M(MI>MJ»2)=RJ:GOSUB1000;GOT060

90 C=C+1:GOSUB800:GOT080

450 REM ** BLINK-1

455 SET(X»Y );SET( X+lfY ):RESET< X»Y >:RESET( X+lfY )

460 RETURN

500 REM ** BETA-I MEM HEAD **

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25 )"RODNEY BETA-i"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB( 15)’'SC0RING VERSION WITH SHOW MEMORY"

520 forl=otoi():print:next

525 INFUT"D0 enter TO START"fS$tRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-2 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193;F4=16255

555 rORF=FlTOF2:POKEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEF»176;NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEFt191:next

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64;P0KEFt1?1:next


158


===== PDF PAGE 161 =====

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-2 **

610 x=io:y=i():i=i:j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM Hf.t FETCH NEU-1 tt

660 RI = RND(5):RJ=RND(5)

665 irRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXF-2T02+ABS( I)IFORYF-lTOl+ABSC J)

735 IFPOINTC X+SGN(I )«XPrY+SGN< J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTtNEXT

745 C0=0;RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REM m UD SCORE-1 ♦♦

805 U$="#*♦♦♦"

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTei5f"NO* CONTACTS"

352 PRINT035r"NO» GOOD MOVES"

353 PRINTOSSr"SCORE"

855 PRINT(?37rC:PRINT(?l()8rD

360 PRINTeil9TUSINGU$fE

865 RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1 **

1010 U=16327

1015 rORM-lT05:FORN=lT05:FORO=lT02

1020 P0KEUrl27+M( M»N»0)

1025 u=u-h:next:next:next

1030 return




                                                      159


===== PDF PAGE 162 =====

              Gathering
              Experimental
  <   '   '

              Data For Beta-1
  /.V-\
There is still some serious and significant demonstrations re¬
maining to be described in connection with BETA-I behavior,
but the BETA work youVe been observing so far ought to be
carefully documented first. The habit patterns of motion and
steadily increasing scores you’ve noted from the work in the
previous chapter have to be translated into clear and convincing
forms, namely some drawings and graphs generated on your own
machine.
     You will find two basic kinds of data-gathering experiments
in this chapter. The first set provides a way to pin down the
BETA creatures habit pattern of motion, ultimately giving you a
set of clear and unambiguous drawings of those patterns. The
second set of experiments compile the results of BETA-I learn¬
ing activity, providing a learning curve that will serve as a
standard for comparison with ALPHA creatures as well as
higher-order creatures yet to be described in this book.

SIMPLE TRAIL-DRAWING FEATURE FOR BETA-I
      You have probably found that it isn’t always easy to detect
the habit pattern every BETA creature eventually establishes for
itself. The program suggested in this section allows the creature
to leave behind a trail wherever it goes, thus greatly simplifying
the job of detecting and tracing its habit pattern of motion.
      This program is a slight variation of the BETA-I BASIC
program already described in great detail in Chapter 9. The
trail-drawing feature comes about by making two rather simple
modifications. The first modification amounts to omitting the
statements in the BLINK subroutine that erases the creature’s
figure after redrawing it in its next position on the screen.
Eliminating the erasing action effectively causes the creature to
leave behind an image of itself, a nice trail. However, this first

160


===== PDF PAGE 163 =====

modification will cause some serious problems if it isn’t coupled
with a second modification. Recall that the BETA creature in
Chapter 9 senses potential contact situations by scanning the
path ahead of it. Detecting the presence of a lighted segment in
its path is tantamount to finding the border figure.
     Unfortunately, for our purposes here, the path-scanning
feature is also sensitive to the creature’s own trail. Upon
detecting a section of trail drawn at some earlier time, the
creature interprets it as a portion of the border figure and
responds by generating a motion code that changes its direction
of motion.
     Reacting to previously drawn sections of its own trail
completely upsets the experiment, creating a dynamic and com¬
plex learning situation that masks the elementary features you
should be documenting at this time. This might suggest an
important project for the future, but it simply messes up the
works right now.
     The bottom line is that the border sensing scheme has to be
changed. The line-drawing program has to be modified so that
the BETA creature completely ignores its own trail, but remains
sensitive to contacts with the border figure. Now that might
sound like a job for BETA-II—a BETA creature that has an
extended sensory system that can discriminate between different
kinds of objects on the screen. Indeed, BETA-II could handle
such a job rather nicely, but you haven’t developed such a
scheeme yet.
     The only alternative is to compromise some of the basic
philosophy of good robotics, just long enough to get some
pictures of BASIC BETA-I habit patterns. What you will do here
is alter the scheme for sensing contact with the border figure,
changing it to a position-sensing scheme. Ouch! That hurts the
philosophy. No robot worthy of the name should have its be¬
havior dictated by its position relative to a fixed frame of
reference. But, maybe you can look at it this way: It is a
negative example of good robotics. You did this sort of thing
once before when building and using the parabot figure in
Chapter 8.
     When you begin working with the BETA-II creature you can
do the trail-drawing operation without violating any of the fun¬
damental features of good robotics. For now, however, you will
be applying a contact-sensing scheme that must not be used as a
foundation for creating good theories about evolutionary, adap-


                                                             161


===== PDF PAGE 164 =====

tive machine intelligence. Just get your pictures of BETA-I trails
and let it go at that.

Loading BETA-1 WITH TRAIL DRAW
     As mentioned earlier, this program is a rather simple
variation of the BETA-I BASIC program described in the early
part of Chapter 9. So begin the task of loading this trail-drawing
program by dumping your BETA-I BASIC into the machine from
cassette tape. Then modify S.500 HEADING and add new
subroutines S.470 and S.700 as shown here:
500 REM**B-I TRAIL HEADING-1 **
605 CLS
510PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB (20)“BASIC VERSION WITH TRAIL”
517 PRINT:PRINT:PRINT“STRIKE ‘E’ TO ERASE EXISTING TRAIL”
520 FORL=0TO7:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT“DO ENTER TO START;S$:RETURN
470 REM**TRAIL DRAW**
475 SET(X,Y);SET(X-I-1’Y):RETURN
700 REM$$BORD POS SENSE -1
705 IF(X-I-1)>124 OR (X-I-1)<40R(Y-I-J)>450R(Y-I-J)<10THEN 715
710CO=:RETURN
715CO=l:RETURN
      Subroutine S.470 TRAIL DRAW, you will notice, is much
the same as S.450 BLINK specified for BETA-I BASIC. This
new version, however, does not include the two RESET state¬
ments for erasing the creature figure each time it moves to a
new position on the screen. This subroutine is thus responsible
for both generating the creature figure and its trail.
      Subroutine S.700 is the one that causes the philosophical
difficulties. It replaces the usual S.725 CONTACT subroutine
which scans the path in front of the creature. Instead of looking
at the path ahead of the creature, line 705 in subroutine S.700
specifies the exact coordinates of the border figure, thus tying
the creature into a fixed frame of reference.
      Like S.725 CONTACT, subroutine S.700 returns to its
master program carrying a value of CO that indicates whether or
not a contact situation is impending. It is thus compatible with
other master programs for BETA creatures.
      The master program for BETA-I WITH TRAIL DRAW is a
simple and direct modification of the master program for BETA-I
BASIC. Assuming you have abready loaded BETA-I BASIC from
cassette tape, you only have to change a few lines. Compare the
following listing with that of your BETA-I BASIC, making the
necessary changes as you go along.

162


===== PDF PAGE 165 =====

10 REM**BETA-I TRAIL MASTER**
15 DIMM(5,5,2)
20 GOSUB500
22 F0R0=1T02;F0RN=1T05;F0RM=1T05:M{M,N,0)=3NEXT:NEXT:NEXT
25 CLS:GOSUB550
30 GOSUB600
35 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:GOSUB700
40 IFCO=0THEN70
45 MI=l+3:MJ=J+3
50 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
55 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN80
60 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB70
65 IFCO=1THEN95
70 GOSUB470
75 E$=INKEY$:IFE$<>“E”THEN35
77 CLS:GOSUB550:GOTO35
80 GOSUB470
85 GOSUB650
90 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M{MI,MJ,2)=RJ;GOTO60
95 GOSUB470:GOTO85

Running the Program and Documenting the Results

      Run the program and watch the BETA creature draw its
trail on the screen. As long as you can see the creature drawing
new paths, you know it has not yet established a complete habit
pattern of motion. But once you lose sight of the creature for
some period of time, you know it is retracing some sections of
the trail pattern, following its own peculiar Beta-type habit.
      If you would like to document the complete history of a
BETA-I creature (not at all a bad idea from a scientific view¬
point), tape a piece of tracing paper onto the screen, start the
program and use a pencil to trace the creature’s figure as it
moves along. When you lose sight of the creature for an ex¬
tended period of time, you can be sure it is following its habit
pattern and that the trail-drawing job is done. All that, and you
have it down on hardcopy, too.
IMPROVED TRAIL-DRAWING PROGRAM FOR BETA-1
     The fact that a BETA creature inevitably establishes a habit
pattern of motion is an essential feature of the whole scheme of
evolutionary machine intelligence and is thus worthy of consid¬
erable study and documentation. The trail-drawing program just
described goes a long way toward helping you document the
habit-forming feature.
     The program shows both the creature’s habit pattern and
the trails it made before full learning took place. That’s nice, but
the picture can be confusing. The program described in this

                                                                163


===== PDF PAGE 166 =====

section allows you to erase the trail drawn prior to the time the
creature finally establishes the habit pattern. The result is a
clearer picture of the habit pattern. The trade off is the loss of
information concerning the learning process.
      This revised trail-drawing program also shows the crea¬
ture’s score and, in fact, allows you the option of eliminating the
trail-drawing feature altogether. This program, dubbed BETA-I
SCORE WITH TRAIL-DRAW OPTION, is an extended version
of BETA-I BASIC WITH SCORING described in Chapter 9. The
flowcharts are much the same, so there is no need to present a
new one in a complete form. To appreciate the differences that
do exist, compare the flowchart in Fig. 9-2 with the drawings in
Fig. 10-1.
      According to Fig.lO-lA, the CONTACT conditionals ap¬
pearing in Fig. 9-2 are replaced with a set of three conditionals:
TRAIL ON, CONTACT, and BORD CONTACT. The critical
variable is T, a variable which indicates whether or not the trail
 is to appear on the screen. If T=l, the trail feature is in effect,
but if T=2, the trail is not to be drawn.You can change the value
of T, and hence the trail-drawing status, anytime you choose
 during the execution of the program.
       So the TRAIL ON conditional in Fig. 10-1A looks at vari¬
able T. If you have specified no trail-drawing operations, TRAIL
 ON is not satisfied and control goes to S.725 CONTACT, the
usual path-scanning, contact-sensing subroutine. If you have
 specified a trail-drawing operation, TRAIL ON is satisfied and
 the philosophy-blowing kind of border contact sensing (the one
 already described in the previous section of this chapter) goes
 into effect.
      Whether or not you have opted for ±e trail drawing feature,
the results are the same when operations leave the conditionals
in Fig. 10-1 A. The system ends up with CO=l if there is a
contact situation and shows a CO=0 if there is not contact.
Everywhere the CONTACT conditional appears on the flowchart
in Fig. 9-2, simply replace it with the three conditionals shown
in Fig. 10-lA.
      Figure 10-lB shows a conditional operation and two ordi¬
nary operations which should replace both BLINK and MOVE on
the flowchart in Fig. 9-2. If you have opted for the trail-drawing
feature, the TRAIL ON conditional in Fig. 10-lB sends opera¬
tions to S.450 TRAIL DRAW, the subroutine that prints the
image of the creature, but does not erase the previous image.
      If, on the other hand, you have elected to run the program

164


===== PDF PAGE 167 =====

without showing any of the trail-drawing effects, TRAIL ON in
Fig. 10-1A sends operations to the usual BLINK subroutine,
S.470. You should recall that this subroutine both draws the
creature in its new position and erases the image from the
pervious position on the screen.




                              (C)


Fig. 10-1. Flowchart modifications for BETA-I SCORE WITH TRAIL-
DRAW OPTION (compare with Fig. 9-2) A. Modifications to CONTAC
conditionals. B. Modifications for BLINK and MOVE operations. C.
Additional operations to be Inserted into the flowchart in Fig. 9-2.

                                                                165


===== PDF PAGE 168 =====

      The partial flowchart shown in Fig. 10-lC is added to the
one shown in Fig. 9-2. This is a set of operations that are
inserted between the MOVE block and the line leading back to
L.30 in the earlier program. All of these conditionals are in¬
tended to give you the option of turning on the trail feature once
the program is running, turn off the trail feature after the
program has started, and erasing the existing trail figure 0)ut
allowing the creature to draw it afresh).
      The latter option is the one that lets you clear all the trail
drawing from the screen and assuming the creature is executing
its habit pattern of motion, it redraws the trail without showing
all the messy portions that lead up to the moment the habit is
established.
      The function of all the operations in Fig. 10-lC will become
clearer when you have a chance to study the master program. It
is sufficient at this time to note the options that are available. All
the conditionals, with the exception of TRAIL ON, are resolved
by in-line INKEY$ operations. The implication is that you can
exercise the options directly from the keyboard without having
to interrupt the program itself.
Loading BETA-1 Score With TRAIL-DRAW Option
    This program is best loaded by first dumping BETA-I
BASIC WITH SCORING (Chapter 9) into your machine from the
cassette tape. The following subroutines will be used without
any modifications:
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-1)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.800 UPDATE DISPLAY (UD SCORE-1)
S.450 BLINK or MOVE (BLINK-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
You have to revise S.500 HEADING to include provisions for
entering your initial choice of trail drawing or no trail drawing:
500 REM**BETA-I TRAIL HEADING-2**
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25) “RODNEY BETA-r’:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB (20) “TRAIL VERSION WITH SCORING”
517    PRINT:PRINT:PRINT:“STRIKE       T’   TO   TURN      ON
TRAIL”:PRINT“STRIKE‘0’ TO TURN OFF TRIAL“:PRINT“STRIKE ‘E’ TO
ERASE ANY TRAIL”
520 FORL= 0TO5:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT“DO ENTER TO START”;:RETURN
You next will have to enter from scratch S.470 TRAIL DRAW
and S. 700 BORD POS SENSE-1 specified in the first section of
this chapter.

166


===== PDF PAGE 169 =====

     The master program for BETA-I SCORE WITH TRAIL-
DRAW OPTION is an extended version of the master program
for BETA-I BASIC WITH SCORING. The latter program should
be loaded in program memory now, so all you have to do is
search through the following listing, entering new lines and
revising a couple of old ones accordingly.
10 REM**BETA-I TRAIL SCORE MASTER**
15DIMM(5,5,2)
17GOSUB500
20 FOR 0=1TOZ:FORN=1 TO 5:FORM=1 TO 5:M{M,N,0)=3:NEXT:NEX-
   T:NEXT
22 T=1
25 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
30 X=X-l-l:Y-hJ:ONTGOSUB700,725
35 IFCO=0THEN75
40 0=0+1 :GOSUB800:ONTGOSUB470,450
45 MI=l+3:MJ=J+3
50RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
55 IF(RI=3) AND(RJ=3)=- 1THEN110
60 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:ONTGOSUB700,725
65IFCO=1THEN120
70D=D+1 :GOSUB800
75ONTGOSUB470.450
8OIFT=1THEN90
85 T$=INKEY$:IFT$=“T”THEN87ELSE30
87 T=1:GOTO30
90 T$=INKEY$:IFT$=“O”THEN95ELSE100
95 T=2:GOTO105
100 E$=INKEY$:IFE$=“E”THEN105ELSE30
1O5CLS:GOSUB550:GOTO30
115M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M{MI,MJ,2)=RJ:GOTO60
120 0=0+1 :GOSUB800 :GOTO10
What to Expect From BETA-I SCORE WITH TRAIL-DRAW OPTION
     Upon starting this program, you should be greeted with a
heading that includes these messages: STRIKE ‘T TO TURN
ON TRAIL, STRIKE‘0' TO TURN OFF TRAIL, and STRIKE
‘E’ TO ERASE ANY TRAIL. These keyboard entries are not to
be entered at the beginning of the program, but they can be used
anytime after the creature begins moving around the screen.
     Line 22 in the master program initializes the value of T to
1. This means the program begins with the trail-drawing feature
in effect. If you do not want to see the trail, however, simply
strike the 0 key and a moment later the routine will continue
without the trail-drawing job.
     If, during the course of the program, you want to erase the
existing trail, but let the creature continue drawing, strike the E
key. A moment later the screen will be completely cleared, you
will note the border figure being redrawn, and a moment after

                                                               167


===== PDF PAGE 170 =====

that the creature figure and new trail will appear at the point
where it left off. The SCORE numbers will be erased too, but
they will reappear with the current value as soon as the creature
makes contact with the border figure.
     If you want to terminate the trail-drawing operation al¬
together, strike the 0 key. The whole screen will clear, but then
the border will be redrawn, the creature will appear in the last
position it held, and the score will return as soon as the critter
makes contact with the border again.
     Incidentally, none of these keyboard changes in this mode of
operation can take place while the creature is tangled up in a
border-contact situation. Wait until it is running freely across the
screen before attempting to change the mode of operation.
     Perhaps the most significant application of this program is
generating a set of pictures showing the great variety of habit
patterns BETA-I creatures can adopt. Start the program, strik¬
ing the T key as soon as you see the creature moving across the
screen. While little BETA is doing its learning operations, tape
a sheet of tracing paper over the screen and then wait for the
creature to find its habit pattern.
     You now have two indicators of a habit pattern. First, you
will no longer be able to see the critter, becasue it is simply
retracing some old paths. And second, you will note the score
rising very steadily.
     Once this happens, strike the E key to erase all the trail left
during the initial learning process. When the creature’s image
reappears, begin tracing its path with a soft lead pencil. Use
arrows to indicate the direction of motion. If indeed the crea¬
ture has established its habit pattern of motion, the entire
pattern will soon appear quite clearly on the screen. You know
the pattern has been completely drawn as soon as you lose sight
of the creature for several successive scoring sequences. The
experiment and your drawing are then done.
     Making a drawing for a new creature is a matter of doing a
keyboard BREAK and running the whole operation from the
beginning. A collection of six or eight such drawings makes a
rather convincing case for the great variety and unpredictable
nature of BETA-Class habit formation.
BETA-1 WITH SCORE COMPILE AND SHOW MEMORY
     The fact that Beta-Class creatures can establish habit pat¬
terns of motion is only one of several significant features. You’ve
had a chance to look at some of the habit patterns and watch

168


===== PDF PAGE 171 =====

them develop, now it is time to gather some quantitative data
regarding Beta-Class learning curves.
       Simply watching the SCORE figures for BETA-I programs
can convince you that BETA creatures learn to cope with their
environment much more effectively ±an any ALPHA creature
can. Instead of plugging away at an average score of about .46 as
ALPHA creatures do, die BETA creatures show a steadily rising
 learning curve that can approach perfection (1.0) if you let the
 little character survive long enough.
       The procedures and rationale for compiling learning curves
has been described before. The most thorough presentation is
found in Chapter 6. The program described here operates much
±e same way, but with a BETA-I creature as the subject. In the
early part of the program you specify the number of creatures to
be run. For the sake of generating a curve that is statistically
reliable, you should specify no less than a hundred creatures.
 Then once the program begins running the little fellows, you can
 walk away for a day, letting the computer do the tedious work
 for you.
       More as a matter of casual interest than anything else, this
 BETA compiling program also shows the Beta-Class memory
 map along the bottom of the screen.
       FigurelO-2 shows the printout and learning curve for 100
 BETA-I creatures as run according to this program. You will be
on firmer scientific grounds if you run your own data, rather than
relying on this figure. The learning curve in Fig. 10-2 is clearly
 different from the one generated by BASIC ALPHA-I in Fig. 6-1.
 Make sure you understand the significance of the obvious differ¬
 ence between these two curves.
       The flowchart for BETA-I WITH SCORE COMPILE AND
 SHOW MEMORY is drawn in Fig. 10-3. While it appears to be a
rather extensive flowchart, a close examination of the details
ought to show it is little more than a combination of the
flowcharts for BETA-I WITH SCORING (Fig. 9-2) and ALPHA-I
COMPILE (FIG. 6-3). That’s about all this program is, ALPHA-I
COMPILE program restructured a bit to deal with BETA crea¬
ture behavior.
       The simplest way to load this program is by first loading
ALPHA-I COMPILE (from Chapter 6) into your machine from
cassette tape. Then all you have to do is modify or enter a few
new subroutines and rewrite the master program. The following
subroutines from ALPHA-I COMPILE carry over to ±is BETA
version wi±out modifications:

                                                               169


===== PDF PAGE 172 =====

S.625 INITIALIZE SERIES (INIT COMP-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.800 UPDATE DISPLAY (UD SCORE-1)
S.875 COMPILE SERIES (PRINT COMP-1)
S.900COMPILE RUN (COMPILE-1)

The following subroutines now residing in your program memory
have to be revised:
S.500HEADING (COMP HEAD-2)
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL COMP-3)
The modifications for S.500 are:
600REM**COMP HEAD-2**
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB (25)“RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINT
515 PRINTTAB(20)“BASIC SCORE COMPILE”
517 PRINT:INPUT‘‘HOW MANY TEST CYCLES”;T
520 FORL= 0 T08:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”;S$:RETURN
You will find S.550 FIELD-2 and S.600 INITIAL COMP-3
subroutines listed in Chapters 9 and 7 respectively. FIELD-2,
you recall, shortens up the bottom of the border figure allowing
room at the bottom of the screen for printing the Beta memory
map. INITIAL COMP-3 is the subroutine that places the initial
position of the creature at some random spot on the screen,
thereby eliminating the statistical drop in scoring at the begin¬
ning of each run. (See the explanation in Chapter 6).
     The two remaining subroutines to be added from scratch
are:
S.1000 SHOW MEMORY (SHOW MEM-1)
S.450 BLINK (BLINK1)
Both of ±ese subroutines are listed in Chapter 9.
    The master program for BETA-I WITH SCORE COMPILE
AND SHOW MEMORY ought to be entered fi'om scratch —it is
simply too different from its ALPHA counterpart to make a
simple revision possible.
10REM**BETA-I COMPILE MASTER**
15DIMT(10,2):DIMM(5,5,2)
2OTN=1:GOSUB500
25 GOSUB625
30FORO=1TO2:FORN=1TO5;FORM=1TO5:M(M,N,O)=3:NEXTM,N,O
35 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
40 X=X-l-l:Y=Y-l-J;GOSUB725
45 IFCO=1THEN55
50 GOSUB450:GOTO40
55 C=C-I-1 :GOSUB900
6OIFC>=THEN130

170


===== PDF PAGE 173 =====

65 GOSUB800:GOSUB4500
70 MI=H-3;MJ=J+3
75 RI=M{MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
8OIF(RI=2)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN85ELSE90
85 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ:GOSUB1000
90l=RI-3:J=RJ-3
95 GOSUB725
100IFCO=1THEN115
1O5D=D+1:GOSUB800
110 GOSUB450:GOTO50
115C=C+1:GOSUB900
12O!FO>=100THEN130
125 GOSUB800:GOTO85
130 IFTN<=TTHEN30
135 GOSUB875
140 GOTO20
      It is a good idea to give the program a couple of brief trial
runs before committing it to an extensive series of creature
lifetimes. You can start by running the program and responding
to the inquiry, HOW MANY CYCLES, by entering the number
1. After the hundred contacts take place (some 15 minutes
later), the program should end by printing out the creature’s
scoring history. Then you should try running the program for 2
creatures, making certain the program shifts to the second one
after 100 contacts and properly prints the average of the two
histories at the end. If you encounter any problems at all with
the program, carefully doublecheck your listing against the one
at the end of this chapter.




Fig. 10-2. Compiled results of a 100-creature BETA-1 experiment.

                                                                   171


===== PDF PAGE 174 =====

     It takes nearly 24 hours to run and compile the results for
100 creatures. So save this program on cassette tape until you
can afford to tie up your computer for that length of time. Copy
the results onto a sheet of paper and make the graph for the
resulting learning curve. The data can be a valuable source of
information for later research. Of course, the most important
thing you can do with the results at this time is to compare it
with the learning curve you have generated for a hundred
ALPHA creatures. There’s quite a difference, isn’t there?


FOR THE PURISTS: AN ALPHA/BETA COMPILE PROGRAM
      Most people would agree that the marked difference bet¬
ween the compiled learning curves for your ALPHA and BETA
creatures makes the point. Indeed, BETA creatures show a
steadily rising learning curve, while ALPHAs do not. But, there
are some critics who might legitimately object to a comparison
of the two curves on the grounds that they were run according to
two different programs. This is a very fine point, but it has some
merit. To get around this sort of objection, you might want to
devise a compiling program that shares its mode of operation
between ALPHA and BETA creatures. ALPHA creature be¬
havior, you see, is a subset of BETA behavior. All the elements
of an ALPHA creature are included in the BETA programs, so it
isn’t too difficult to modify an existing BETA program to create
ALPHA behavior.
     The following program gives you the option of running
ALPHA or BETA compiling experiments. You can, for instance,
set it up to run a hundred creatures in the ALPHA mode, gather
the compiled data at the end of the experiment and then set up
the same program for running a hundred BETA creatures. The
resulting curves thus come from the same program source, and
there are no longer any reasonable grounds for questioning the
validity of the comparison.
     This program is a variation of the BETA-I WITH SCORE
COMPILE AND SHOW MEMORY program featured in the
previous section of this chapter. So begin the programming
process by loading that program into your machine. The follow¬
ing subroutines carry over without any modifications:
S.625 INITIALIZE SERIES (INIT COMP-1)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.800 UPDATE DISPLAY (UD SCORE-1)

172


===== PDF PAGE 175 =====

Fig. 10-3. Flowchart for BETA-I WITH SCORE COMPILE AND SHOW
MEMORY.


                                                        173


===== PDF PAGE 176 =====

S.900COMPILE RUN (COMPILE-1)
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL COMP-3)
These two subroutines have to be modified a little bit:
S.500 HEADING (COMP HEAD-3)
S.875 COMPILE SERIES (PRINT COMP-1)
500REM ♦* COMP HEAD-3 **
505CLS
516 PRINTTAB (20 )“RODNEY ALPHA/BETA COMPILE”
515 PRINT:PRINT‘ALPHA OR BETA MODE?”:PRINTTAB (10)”1 - AL-
PHA”:PRI NTTAB(10)‘‘2 - BETA”:INPUTMO
516 IFM0=10RM0=2THEN517ELSE515
517 PRINT INPUT'HOW MANY TEST CYCLES”;T
520 FORL=0TO5:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN

                 Variables introduced: MO, L, S$
                 Variables required at start: none

Test routine

1 GOSUB500:PR1NTMO,T
2 INPUTX$:G0T01

875 REM ** PRINT COMP-2 **
880CLS:PRINT”COMPILED RESULTS FOR”TN-r‘CYCLES”:PRINT
881 0NM0G0T0882,883
882 PRINT'ALPHA M0DE”:G0T0885
883 PRINT’BETA MODE”
885 FORN=1TO10:FC=T(N,1):FD=T(N,2)
890 PRINTN*10”=”::PRINTUSINGU$;FD/FC:NEXT
895 PRINT:PRINT:INPUT‘‘DONE”;X$:RETURN

               Variables introduced: N, FC, FD, X$
               Variables required to start: U$, TN

    The master program need not be completely rewritten. Just
make the following revisions or additions to the existing one:

10 REM ♦* ALPHA/BETA COMP MASTER **
36 0NM0G0T037, 38
37 POKE16325,65:GOTO40
38 POKE16325,66
67IFMO=1THEN85
85 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:IFMO=1THEN90
87 M(MI, MJ, 1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
105 D=D-I-1 :GOSUB800:GOSUB1000
110 GOTO50

    In this master program, MO is a variable that determines
whether the program should execute ALPHA or BETA behavior.

174


===== PDF PAGE 177 =====

Upon running the program, you are greeted with the question,
ALPHA OR BETA MODE? 1 - ALPHA, 2 - BETA. If you want
to run ALPHA creatures, respond by entering the number 1, and
to run a BETA creature, respond by entering the number 2. This
INPUT operation sets the value of variable MO.
      Whenever you run this program in the ALPHA mode, you
will find a letter A printed near the lower left-hand comer of the
screen. Running the program in the BETA mode, a letter B is
displayed in the lower left-hand comer of the screen, and the
BETA memory map is drawn along the bottom of the border
figure. When the results are printed out at the end of an
experiment, the tabulation is labeled either ALPHA MODE or
BETA MODE as appropriate.
      The idea is to run the program for at least a hundred
creatures, selecting the ALPHA mode during the initial heading
phase of the job. Copy down the compiled results some 18 to 20
hours later, and then restart the program, specifying the BETA
mode of operation.
      The two learning curves gathered from this two-phase
project form the basis for a strong argument concerning the
evolution of machine intelligence. There is no longer any room
for arguing that the BETA program was somehow “loaded” to
show the desired results—both curves come from the same
program format.

SUGGESTED PROJECT FOR AMBITIOUS EXPERIMENTERS
     The two data-compiling programs suggested in this chapter
require rather long times for complete execution. It takes some¬
thing on the order of two days to run both phases of the
ALPHA/BETA program.
     It is altogether possible to completely rewrite the programs
using POKE and PEEK graphics in place of the slower SET and
RESET graphics that is specified. The result would be much
faster execution of the experiments. You could run a hundred
creatures in a much shorter period of time; or, better yet, make
it possible to run perhaps a thousand creatures in a tolerable
length of time. Remember, the larger the number of creatures
you run in a compiling experiment, the more sound your statisti¬
cal foundation will be.
     See the use of PEEK and POKE graphics, as applied to
ALPHA-II creatures, in Chapter 8. That should give you some
hints concerning the programming procedures.

                                                              175


===== PDF PAGE 178 =====

COMPOSITE LISTINGS
BETA-1 WITH TRAIL DRAW Listing

10 REIM     BETA-I TRAIL MASTER

15 DIMM(5t5»2 )

20 G03UB500

22 F0R0=lTa2;F0RN=lT05:F0RM=lT05:M(MfN»0)=3:NEXT:NEXT :NEXT

25 CL3:G0SUB550

30 GOSUB600

35 x=x+i:y=y+j:gosub70(>

40 IFCO=0THEN70

45 MI = I+3:M.J=J+3

50 RI=M< MI»MJ»1 );RJ=M(m»MJ»2)

55 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN80

60 I=RI-3:.J=RJ-3:GOSUB700

65 IFC0=1THEN95

70 GOSUB470

75 E^=INKEY$:iFE$<>'’E"THEN35

77 CLS:G0SUB550tGOTO35

80 G0SUB470

85 G0SUB650

90 M(MIrM.J»l )=RI t M( MI r MJ»2 )=RJ :G0T060

95 GOSUB470:GOT085

450 REM ** BLINK-1

455 SET(X»Y):SET<X+lfY )JRESET( XfY ):RESET<X+1»Y )

460 RETURN

470 REM r* TRAIL DRAW

475 SET(XrY )tSET(X+lrY):RETURN

500 REM       B-I TRAIL HEADING-1 »»

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25)"R0DNEY BETA-i"tPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(20 )"BASIC VERSION WITH TRAIL"


176


===== PDF PAGE 179 =====

517 PRINT:PRINT:PRINT"STRIKE 'E' to erase existing trail**

520 forl=oto7:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"»S$tRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16321:F4=16383

555 F0RF=F1T0F2:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4;P0KEFt176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEFt191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEF r191tNEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-1 $*

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW-1 **

660 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5)

665 IFRI=:3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

700 REM ** BORD POS SENSE-1 **

705 IF( X+I ):; 1240R( X+I )<40R( Y+J )>450R( Y+J )<10THEN715

710 co=o;return

715 co=i:return

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 *$

730 FQRXP--=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS< J )

735 IFPOINT( X+SGN( I )*XP»Y+SGN( J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 next:NEXT

745 (:0=0: RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN


BETA-1 SCORE WITH TRAIL-DRAW OPTION Listing
10 REM t* BETA-1 TRAIL SCORE MASTER

15 DIMM< 5»5»2 )

17 GOSUB500


                                                                177


===== PDF PAGE 180 =====

20 foro=ito2:forn=ito5:form=ito5:m(m,n»o)=3:next:next:next

22

25 CLS:GOSUB550;GOSUB600

30 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:ONTGOSUB700f725

35 IFCO=OTHEN75

40 C==C + 1 JGOSUBSOO :aNTGOSUB470 » 450

45 MI = I+3:HJ=.J+3

50 RI=M(MIfMJrl ):RJ=M(MI»hJT2)

55 IF(RI=3 )AND<RJ=3)=-1THEN110

60 I=RI-3:.J=RJ-3:ONTGOSUB700»725

65 IFCO=1THEN120

70 D=D+1:GOSUB800

75 ONTGOSUB470»450

80 IFT=1THEN90

85 T$=INKEY$:IFT$="T"THEN87ELSE30

87 T=1IGOT030

90 T$=INKEY$:iFT$="0"THEN95ELSE100

95 T=2:GOT0105

100 E$=INKEY$ : IFE$=”E'’ THEN105ELSE30

105 CLS:GOSUB550;GOT030

110 ONTG03UB470t450:GOSUB650

115 M(MIrMJrl )=RI:M( HI>MJr2 )=RJ:G0T060

120 c=c-i-i:gosub8oo:gotoiio

450 REM ** BLINK-1

455 3ET(X»Y ):SET(X+1fY )IRESEK XtY ):RESET( X + 1»Y )

460 RETURN
470 REM ** TRAIL DRAU **

475 3ET(XrY ):SET(X+1»Y):RETURN

500 REM ** BETA-I TRAIL HEADING-2

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25 )"RQDNEY BETA-i"IPRINT
515 PRINTTAB( 20 )’‘TRAIL VERSION WITH SCORING"

178


===== PDF PAGE 181 =====

517 PRINT:PRINT:PRINT"STRIKE 'T' to turn on TRAIL":
    PRINT-STRIKE 'O'      TO TURN 0
FT TRAIL":PRINT"STRIKE 'E'     TO ERASE ANY TRAIL"

520 F0RL=()T05:PRINT:NEXT

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"»S$tRETURN

550 REM       FIELD-1

552 F1=15553:F2=15615;F3=16321:F4=16383

555 FQRF=F1T0F2:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFrl76:NEXT

565 forf=fitof4Step64:pokeff191:next

570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:POKEFy191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM m INITIAL-2 **

610 x=io:y=i()II=i:.j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1 **

660 RI=RND<5):RJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

700 REM m BORD POS SENSE-1 **

705 IF< X4 I »1240R( X-fl )<40R< Y+J )>450R( Y+J )<10THEN715

710 C0=0:RETURN

715 CO=i:RETURN

725 REM m CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02fABS(I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS(J )

735 IFPOINT( X-I-3GN( I )»XP>Y+SGN( J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTtNEXT

745 co=o:return

750 co=i:return

800 REM       UD SCORE-1 **

805 U$="♦♦♦♦♦"


                                                               179


===== PDF PAGE 182 =====

810 E=ri/C

850 PRINT(315r"N0. CONTACTS"

852 PRINTG35»"N0» GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINT(355f "SCORE"

855 PRINTe87»C:PRINT01()a»D

860 PRINT(?119»USINGU$rE

865 RETURN

BETA-1 SCORE COMPILE AND SHOW MEMORY Listing
10 REM ** BETA-I COMPILE MASTER »*

15 DIMT( 10»2);DIMM(5»5»2)

20 TN=1:G0SUB500

25 G0SU662S

30 F0R0=lT02;F0RN=lT05:F0RM-lT05:M(MrNf0)=3:NEXTMfNf0

35 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600

40 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

45 IFC0=1THEN55

50 GOSUB450;GOT040

55 C==C+1:GOSUB900

60 IF0100THEN130

65 GOSUB800:GOSUB450

70 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3

75 RI=M(MlfMJfl ):RJ*M(MI»MJf2)

80 IF(RI=3 )AND(RJ=3 )-lTHEN85ELSE90

85 G0SUB450:G0SUB6501H( MIf MJ f1>»R1SM( MIfHJf2)»RJ:G0SU61000

90 I=RI-3JJ=RJ-3

95 G0SUB725

100 IFC0=1THEN115

105 D=D+1:GOSUB800

110 GOSUB450:GOT050

115 C=C+1:GOSUB900

120 IF0100THEN130


180


===== PDF PAGE 183 =====

125 G0SUB800:G0T085

130 IFTN<=TTHEN30

135 G0SUB875

140 GOT020

450 REM ** BLINK-1 tt

455 SET( X»Y );SET( X+lfY):reset< X»Y ):RESET( X+lfY)

460 RETURN
500 REM m COMP HEAD-2 »*

505 CL3

510 PRINTTAB(25)"R0DNEY BETA-I"IPRINT

515 PRINTTAB(20 )"BASIC SCORE COMPILE"

517 print:INPUT"HOW MANY TEST CYCLES'ST

520 F0RL=()T08:PRINT:NEXT

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"fS^tRETURN

550 REM       FIELD-1

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFr131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF=FlT0F4STEP64:P0KEFfl9i:NEXT

570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:POKEF>191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL COMP-3 **

605 G0SUB650

610 X=RI+25:Y=RJ+25:G0SUB650

612 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

625 REM **. INITIAL COMP-1 **

630 FDRN = 1T010:FORM=1T02:T( NfM)=0:NEXT:NEXT

635 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-l **

660 RI = RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5)


                                                        181


===== PDF PAGE 184 =====

665 IFRI=3ANDR.J=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM 5K* CON SENSE-1 **

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ) tF0RYP=1T01+ABS( J )
735 IFPOINK X+SGN(I )*XPfY+SGN< J )*YP )=-lTHEN750
740 NEXTtNEXT
745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

SCO REM t* UD SCORE COMP-1

805

810 E=D/C

845 PRINTPO,"CREATURE NO."

850 PRINT(?15r'’N0. CONTACTS”

852 PRINT@35»“N0. GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINT(355f "SCORE"

855 PRINTe87>C:PRINTei08»Ii

857 PRINT(364tTN" 0F"T

860 PRINTeil9rUSINGU$»E

865 RETURN

875 REM ** PRINT COMP-1 »»

880 CLS:PRINT"C0MPILED results FOR"TN-l"CYCLES"tPRINT

885 F0RN=1T010:FC=T( Nfl>:FD=T(N>2)

890 PRINTN*10"="ftPRINTUSINGU$?FD/FC:NEXT

895 PRINT:PRINT:INPUT-DONE"JXftRETURN

900 REM ♦♦ COMPILE-1 **

905 IFC/10<>INT(C/10 )RETURN

910 TF=INT<C/10 ):T(TFfl )=T( TF» 1 )+C;T( TFf2 )=T( TF»2 )+D

915 IFTFCIORETURN

920 TN=TN+i:RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1

1010 U=16327

1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO=1T02

182


===== PDF PAGE 185 =====

1020 P0KEU»127+M(M»Nf0)

1025 U=Ufi:NEXT:NEXT:NEXT
1030 RETURN

ALPHA/BETA COMPILE Listing
10 REM ** ALPHA/BETA COMP MASTER **

15 DIMT( 10»2 ):DIMM(5»5»2)

20 TN=1:GOSUB500

25 G0SUB625

30 FORO=1T02:FORN=1T05:FORM=1T05:M(MfN»0)=3:NEXTMrN»0

35 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB600

36 0NM0G0T037»38

37 POKE16325f65:GOT040

38 P0KE16325r66

40 x=x+i:y=y+j:gosub725

45 IFC0=1THEN55

50 GOSUB450:GOT040

55 C=C+1:GOSUB900

60 IF0100THEN130

65 GOSUB800:GOSUB450

67 IFM0=1THEN85

70 mi=i+3:mj=j+3

75 RI=M(MItMJ»1 ):RJ=M(MIfMJf2)

80 IF( RI=3 )AND(RJ=3 )-lTHEN85ELSE90

85 G0SUB450:G0SUB650;IFM0=1THEN90

87 M( MIrMJrl )=Ri:M<MIrMJ»2 )=RJ

90 i=ri-3:j=rj-3

95 G0SUB725

100 IFC0=1THEN115

105 d=d+i:gosub80o:gosubiooo

110 GOT050
115 C=C+1:GOSUB900
120 IF0100THEN130


                                                        183


===== PDF PAGE 186 =====

125 GOSUB80():GOT085

130   IFTNOTTHEN30

135 G0SUB875
140 GOT020

450 REM       BLINK-1

455 SET( XfY):SET<X+l»Y):RESET(XfY):RESET(X+l»Y )

460 RETURN

500 REM ** COMP HEAD-3 **

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(25 )"RODNEY ALPHA/BETA COMPILE”

515 PRINT:PRINT”ALPHA or beta MODE?”: PRINTTAB( 10 )"1
    ALPHA":PRINTTAB<10)”2 - BETA”:INPUTMO


516 IFMO=10RMO=2THEN517ELSE515

517 PRINT:INPUT"H0W many test CYCLES">T

520 forl=oto5:print:next
525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"»S$:RETURN
550 REM ** FIELD-1 **
552 Fl=155531F2=15615:F3=l6193:F4=16255
555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFfl3i:NEXT
560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFt176:NEXT
565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEFt191:NEXT
570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT
 575 RETURN

 600 REM ** INITIAL COMP-3 **

 605 G0SUB650
 610 X=RI+25:Y=R.J+25:GOSUB650
 612 I=RI-3:.J = RJ-3
615 c=o:d=o
620 RETURN
625 REM t* INITIAL COMP-1 tt
630 forn--=itoio:form=ito2:t(n»m)=o:next:next
635 RETURN
650 REM *4 FETCH NEW-1 **
660 RI = RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5 )
665 IFRI=3ANriRJ^3THEN660
670 RETURN


184


===== PDF PAGE 187 =====

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 tt

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I):F0RYP=1T01+ABS(J >

735   IFPOINK X+SGN( I )*XPfY+SGN( J )»YP )=-lTHEN750
740   NEXTtNEXT

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 co=i:return
800 REM ** UD SCORE COMP-1 **
805 U$=’'*****"

810 E=D/C

845 PRINTeOy"CREATURE NO*"
850 PRINT015r"NO* CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35f"N0* GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55f"SCORE"
855 PRINT087rC:PRINTeiO8»D

857 PRINTe64,TN" OF"T
860 PF:INT0119TUSINGUifE

865 RETURN
875 REM        PRINT COMP-2

830 CL3:PRINT"C0MPILED results F0R“TN-1"CYCLES":print
881 ONM0GOTO882»883

832 PRINT"ALPHA MODE":G0T0885
333 PRINT"BETA MODE"

835 F0RN=:1T010:FC=T( Nrl ):FD=T< N»2 )

890 PRINTN*10"-=" i :PRINTUSINGU$fFD/FCINEXT
895 print:print:INPUT"DONE"JX$:RETURN
 900 REM tH/i COMPILE-1 tt
905   IFC/10<>INT<C/10 )RETURN
910 TF=INT(C/10 ):T(JFf 1 )=T( TF»1 )+C:T< TFr2 )=T( TF12 )+D
915 IFTF<10RETURN
920 TN=TN+1JRETURN
1000 REM       SHOU MEM-1 **
1010 W=16327
1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO*1T02
1020 P0KEUfl274M(MrN»0)
1025 u=ufi:next:next:next
1030 RETURN

                                                           185


===== PDF PAGE 188 =====

j\
      11      Disturbing the
              Beta-1 Environment

The discussions, experiments, and programs in Chapter 10 show
that a Beta-Class creature seeks a habit pattern of motion and, in
the process, exhibits a scoring curve which approaches perfection.
Alpha-Class creatures are totally incapable of showing either of
these learning features, simply because the lower-class creatures
lack a working memory of experiences with the environment.
      The work, as presented thus far, does not clearly demonstrate
the adaptive behavior of Beta-Class machines. None of the experi¬
ments in Chapter 10 suggest upsetting BETA’S environment in any
significant way, so there was really no opportunity to appreciate its
adaptive qualities—the ability to adapt its memory and habit pat¬
terns of motion to new and unforseen circumstances in the envi¬
ronment.
      The three programs offered in this chapter give BETA a
chance to learn its way around the environment, putting successful
responses into its memory and eventually establishing a habit
pattern of motion. But after that, the environment is upset. The
creature is called upon to deal with circumstances not encountered
or those dealt with successfully during the initial learning process.
      Upsetting the environment after the initial learning phase
takes place forces the creature to deal with new circumstances by
calling upon successful responses from the past, altering some of
the old responses, and, of course, generating and remembering
some new ones. This, in a few words, is the adaptive mechanism of
Beta-Class creatures at work.

PREVIEW OF BETA-CLASS ADAPTIVE BEHAVIOR
     During the initial learning phase of a Beta-Class mechanism, it
encounters just so many environmental circumstances. It uses the
successful responses to those encounters as guides for dealing with
similar situations in the future, and as a result, eventually estab-

186


===== PDF PAGE 189 =====

lishes a pattern of motion that includes many of the successfully
executed responses. Not all of the previously successful responses
need be included in the habit pattern of motion, but the habit
pattern must be built around conditions the creature has dealt with
before.
      It is highly unlikely that the creature, during the initial learn¬
ing phase of its existence, will encounter a// possible environmen¬
tal conditions. The habit pattern of motion will be developed before
the creature has a chance to encounter all possible conditions and
use all the responses at its disposal. So once the habit pattern of
motion is established, the creature will not be called upon to deal
with circumstances it has not encountered before, unless some¬
thing happens to upset the environment and, hence, the workability
of the habit pattern.
      There are a number of ways to upset the environment for a
BETA creature that is learning its way around on the screen. The
simplest and most effective technique, however, is to force upon it
a motion code not included in its habit pattern.
      All of the creatures described in this book have access to a
family of 24 different motion codes. Suppose, during the initial
learning process, a BETA creature solves its encounters with the
border figure by using 10 of those motion codes and, furthermore,
ends up using 8 of them in its habit pattern of motion. Thus, there
are 14 motion codes it has never used before and 16 of them that
aren’t being used in the habit pattern.
      Now, if the creature in this example is somehow fed a motion
code it has used before, but one that is not included in the habit
pattern, the pattern of motion will be temporarily disrupted. In this
instance, the creature is presented with a situation it has dealt with
before in a successful fashion, and chances are good that the
remembered response will work again this time. The pattern will
be disrupted for a short time, but it is unlikely the creature will
make a bad move. The score will continue to rise since the creature
soon picks up its old habit pattern of motion.
      But now suppose this same creature is suddenly fed a motion
code it has not used before. Upon running into the border figure,
the creature must call upon its Alpha-like reflex mechanism to pick
a new response. K tlie new response doesn’t work, the score drops
a bit, and if the second try doesn’t work, the score drops even
further. The disturbed creature will eventually find a response
that works, remember it, and go about its business. In the
meantime, however, the score level has dropped.

                                                                    187


===== PDF PAGE 190 =====

     How long will it take the BETA creature to find a habit pattern
and show a rising score again? That’s hard to say, because it
depends on how long it takes the creature to get back into a familiar
set of circumstances. It might make it to familiar patterns after one
move, or it might require a number of encounters (many perhaps
entirely new) before setting up a habit pattern again. The new habit
pattern of motion might eventually turn out to be identical to the old
one, similar to it, or even entirely different.
     The point is this: Throwing a BETA creature a motion code it
has not executed before disrupts its normal pattern of behavior,
forcing it to adapt to a new set of circumstances. The scoring level
drops, but as the creature works with the situation, the scoring
level begins to rise again and approaches perfection as a habit
pattern is worked out.
      Recall that Alpha-Class machines are not at all disturbed by
changes in their environments. They just keep plugging away at
their characteristic, random-oriented scoring level. In a sense, the
ALPHA creatures are perfectly adaptable.
      Beta-Class machines can be terribly upset, at least temporar¬
ily, by new circumstances. They do adapt, but it takes some time.
That is a small price to pay, however, for learning scores that
surpass anything an Alpha-Class creature can do.
      Figure 11-1 compares the scoring of Alpha- and Beta-Class
mechanisms before and after a serious disturbance in the environ¬
ment takes place. Note that the Beta creature is given some time to
learn its way around the environment before the disturbance is
injected into the scene. BETA shows a rising scoring curve that
would run very close to 1.0 if the disturbance weren’t injected.
ALPHA, however, shows its characteristic, even-level score.
     At the moment the disturbance takes place, BETA shows a
dramatic drop in its scoring level, while ALPHA remains totally
unperturbed. But after the disturbance takes place, BETA’S
scoring curve begins to rise again. Both creatures have adapted
to the disturbance in their own fashion.
     There is far more to the adaptive quality of Beta-Class
machines that has been described thus far. The discussion to this
point, and the curve in Fig. 11-1, apply to a single disturbance
following an initial learning phase for the BETA creature. How
will BETA respond to a second serious disturbance? A third
one? A fourth one?
     Each time a Beta-Class machine is presented with a new set
of circumstances (and allowed time to deal with the situation) it

188


===== PDF PAGE 191 =====

Fig. 11-1. Responses of ALPHA and BETA creatures to a disturbance in
the environment.

becomes a bit smarter. Every time BETA is thrust into a new
situation, the number of untried responses becomes smaller; or,
to put it another way, the number of proven and remembered
responses becomes larger.
     With experience, gained only by repeated traumas, a
Beta-Class machine exhibits improved adaptive qualities. At the
very extreme, BETA will end up encountering every conceiva¬
ble set of environmental circumstances, and there is nothing one
can do to the environment to upset the creature. Ideally, it will
pick up a quality of perfect adaptibility and a scoring level of 1.00
that cannot be lowered in any way.
     Each upset in a BETA’S environment makes it a bit smarter
and less apt to be thrown into confusion (reaching for random
responses) by future changes in the environment. Figure 11-2
shows a hypothetical adaptive curve for a Beta-Class
mechanism.
     The three programs presented in ±is chapter give you a
chance to observe and test the adaptive qualities of a basic
BETA creature. In the first case, you will be able to upset the
creature by injecting motion codes of your own selection. The
second program slicks up the operation by letting you cycle
through all 24 possible motion-code upsets by simply striking
the D key.
     The third program, the most extensive presented thus far,
compiles the adaptive curves for any number of creatures you

                                                                 189


===== PDF PAGE 192 =====

Fig. 11-2. An ideal adaptive learning curve for a BETA creature being
subjected to new environmental conditions.

choose. It is fully automatic, and once you set the program into
motion, you can forget about using your computer for quite some
time. But when the experiment is done, you will have in your hands
unquestionable evidence that simple home computers are capable
of exhibiting adaptive machine intelligence.
BETA-1 ADAPTIVE PROGRAM WITH MANUAL DISTURB
    The main purpose of this first program is to let you
observe, first hand, the adaptive qualities of a BETA creature.
You can enter the “disturbances” at any time and observe the
immediate effects. The program also has an ALPHA option,
making it easy to compare the results.
Flowchart for Adaptive Program with Manual Disturb
     The flowchart for this particular program is illustrated in
Fig. 11-3. Notice ±at it starts out in a rather ordinary way for
BETA-I programs: the first step dimensions the memory, a
heading is printed on the screen, then the creature’s position and
direction of motion are initialized, the Beta memory is cleared,
and then the field is drawn on the screen.
     The only operation of special note to this point is HEAD¬
ING. It includes a question, ALPHA OR BETA MODE? It’s your
choice. If you select ALPHA, you will run the program \\ithout
any sort of memory for the creature, and you cannot expect to
see anything new happening whenever you disturb the creature
from the keyboard. But, if you opt for BETA, you will be able to
see some of the basic characteristics of Beta-Class adaptive
behavior whenever you input a disturbance.

190


===== PDF PAGE 193 =====

     All five ALPHA conditionals appearing on the flowchart in
Fig. 11-3 are satisfied (Y outputs) if you opt for ALPHA MODE
during the HEADING operation. Otherwise, for the BETA
MODE, follow the N outputs from each of the ALPHA condition¬
als.




                                                          191


===== PDF PAGE 194 =====

    The first ALPHA conditional, the one immediately following
DRAW FIELD simply determines whether an A ov B letter
should appear near the lower right-hand comer of the screen.
The purpose of the letter is to remind you which mode of
operation is in effect. If that ALPHS conditional is satisified, the
system prints an A down there in the comer, otherwise it prints
a5.
      After printing the appropriate letter designation, the system
sets up the first creature move at SET MOVE, and then it scans
the path ahead for an obstacle by means of a CONTACT
conditional. If that CONTACT conditional is satisfied, the sys¬
tem increments the contact counter at C=C+1 and the program
progress in a manner identical to BETA-I BASIC WITH SCOR¬
ING (FIG. 9-2), with a couple of ALPHA conditionals thrown in
as appropriate.
      The DISTURB operations are enabled only when the first
CONTACT conditional is not satisfied. Return to this particular
CONTACT conditional, the one following SET MOVE, and
consider the string of operations resulting from a N output. The
first operation in that string is a BLINK. There’s nothing new
about that. It simply blinks the creature figure on and off.
      The DISTURB conditional is actually an INKEY$ operation.
It is satisfied only if the operator has tapped the D key. If the D
key has not been depressed, DISTURB is not satisfied and
operations cycle from CONTACT to SET MOVE in the usual
fashion—a fashion that allows the creature to move one step on
the screen.
      But, if the DISTURB conditional is satisfied (because the
operator has hit the D key), the system calls a DISTURB
subroutine. The DISTURB subroutine operation is shown in
flowchart form in Fig. 11-4. The first thing the DISTURB
subroutine does is print out the current status of the creature’s
motion code. That’s the PRINT STATUS output operation.
Actually, the screen is cleared temporarily and you see a
message such as:
CURRENT STATUS:
 I=-l
 J=2
     This particular example says the creature is currently mov¬
ing with I=-l and J=2 (downward and slightly to the left).
     The next operation, INPUT NEW I,J, gives you the chance
to disturb the creature by entering a new motion code. Maybe

192


===== PDF PAGE 195 =====

    Fig. 11-4. Flowchart forS.1200
   DISTURBANCE subroutine.




you’d like it to move straight to the right at full speed. In that
case you would enter 1=2 J=0. You can enter any combination of
I and J values you wish, as long as (1) neither value is outside the
range of -2 to 2 inclusively, (2) you don’t use any fractional
expressions such as -1.35, and (3) both values aren’t equal to
zero. Those three combinations of motion codes are considered
invalid, and it is the job of the VALID conditional in Fig. 11-4 to
prompt you to enter the right kinds of motion codes. If you
should happen to enter an invalid motion code, the system goes
to PRINT INVALID MESSAGE and prints INVALID VALUE
ENTERED. TRY AGAIN. Operations then move back up to
INPUT NEW I,J, thereby giving you a chance to do the job right.
      Assuming you enter a valid motion code, the VALID condi¬
tional is satisfied, and the next step is to test for contact with
the border figure. The scheme as it is set up here cannot accept
motion codes of the disturbance variety if those codes run the
creature out of the border figure. So, if you enter a motion code
that satisfies the .CONTACT conditional in Fig. 11-4, you’re
going to get a polite request for another motion code—
presumably one ±at is both valid and causes no contact with the
border figure.
      Once you have entered a valid and non-contacting “distur¬
 bance,” the system sets the score to zero and returns to the
 main program. By setting the score to zero after doing a
 disturbance routine, you can see more clearly the effect of the
 disturbance on the scoring. Without clearing the score, much of
the effect would be lost within a past history of successful
responses generated during the earlier learning phases.
                                                               193


===== PDF PAGE 196 =====

      In the analysis of the flowchart in Fig. 11-3, you should now
be at the point where the DISTURB subroutine (the one just
described in connection with Fig. 11-4) goes to an ALPHA
conditional. If you are operating in the ALPHA mode, the
ALPHA conditional is satisfied and the program returns to
DRAW FIELD. In essence, the original figures are restored to
their places on the screen, but now the creature moves off in a
direction specified during the DISTURB operation.
      If you are operating in the BETA mode, however, leaving
the DISTURB operation carries the sequence down to INPUT
 CM. This is a simple INPUT operation which gives you the
option of clearing the Beta memory. Normally you don’t want to
clear the memory—you want to see what effect your disturbance
has on the existing memory.
      However, the option of starting a new BETA creature from
a blank memory is available at this point. If you choose not to
clear the memory, the CLEAR MEMORY conditional is not
satisfied and operations go back up to DRAW FIELD to restore
the experiment to the point where it was, prior to the DISTURB
sequence. Otherwise, operations return all the way to CLEAR
MEMORY.
      Of course, this program shows the usual array of scoring
figures across the top of the screen, and it displays the Beta
memory map along the bottom. See the UPDATE SCORE and
SHOW MEMORY operations, respectively.
     In short, this program allows you to run a basic ALPHA
with scoring or a basic BETA with scoring and showing memory.
In either case, you can disturb the environment by altering the
current motion code and observe the results of the subsequent
adaptive intelligence at work.

Loading Adaptive Program With Manual Disturb
     The first step for loading this program is to load BETA-I
BASIC WITH SCORING AND SHOWING MEMORY from your
cassette tape. (See Chapter 9). This will get most of the
necessary subroutines into program memory. In fact, the follow¬
ing subroutines carry over without any changes:
S. 550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
S. 725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S. 450 BLINK (BLINK-1)
S. 600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
S. 800 UPDATE SCORE (UD SCORE-1)
S. 650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.1000 SHOW MEMORY (SHOW MEM-I)

194


===== PDF PAGE 197 =====

     Subroutine S.500 HEADING has to be revised a little bit,
and, of course, you have to add S.1200 DISTURB (DISTURB-1)
from scratch.

500REM ♦♦ DIST HEAD-1 **
505 CLS
51 0PRINTTAB(20)“RODNEY ALPHA/BETA DISTURB”
515 PRINT:PRINT‘ALPHA OR BETA MODE?”:PRINTTAB (10)”1 - ALP¬
HA” :PRINTTAB(10)‘‘2 - BETA”:INPUTMO
516 IFMO=1ORMO=2THEN520ELSE515
520 FORL=0TO6:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT'DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN
   Variables required at start: none
   Variables introduced: MO
1200REM *♦ DISTURB-1 **
1205CLS:PRINT”CURRENT STATUS:”PRINT
1210 PRINTTAB(10)‘‘=IPRINTTAB(10)”J=‘‘J
1215 INPUT‘‘NEW l”;l:INPUT “NEW J
122OIF(I=0ANDJ=0)OR(I      INT(l))OR(l<-20RI ' 2)OR(J <>INT(J))OR
     (J<-20RJ '2)THEN1230
1222GOSUB725:IFO=1THEN1230
1225C=0:D=0:RETURN
1230 PRINT”INVALID VALUE ENTERED. TRY AGAIN”;G0T01215
     Since the master program in this case has quite a few
additional operations, there’s nothing to be gained by trying to
salvage the old master program. So delete it and enter this one:
10 REM ** ALPHA/BETA DISTURB MASTER **
15DIMM(5,5,2)
20 GOSUB500
25GOSUB600
30 F0R0=1T02:F0RM:oiT05:F0RN=1T05:M(M,N,0)=3:NEXTM,N,0
35 CLS:GOSUB550
36 0NM0G0T037,38
37 POKE16325,65:GOTO40
38 POKE16325,66
40 X=X-hl:Y=Y-l-J:GOSUB725
45 IFCO=1THEN65
50 GOSUB450:D$=INKEY$:IFD$<>“D”THEN40ELSEGOSUB1200
55 IFMO=1TH
67 IFMO=1THEN85
70 MI=l+3:MJ=J+3
75 RI=M(MI,MJ.1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
80 IF(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=- 1THEN85ELSE90
85 GOSUB45O;GOSUB65O:IFMO=1THEN90
87 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
90l=RI-3:J=RJ-3
95 GOSUB725
1OOIFCO=1THEN120
105 D=D-f-1:GOSUB800
11OIFMO=2GOSUB1000
115GOTO40
120C=C+1;GOTO85

                                                                195


===== PDF PAGE 198 =====

What to Expect From This Program
      Run the program and select the BETA mode of operation.
The border figure, creature, and letter B should appear on the
screen within a short time. The scoring figures and memory map
then appear after the creature makes its first contact with the
border figure.
      Watch the creature’s pattern of motion, memory map, and the
scoring for signs that it is locking in on its habit pattern. Whenever
that happens, the score rises steadily, and the memory map no
longer shows any changes whenever the creature makes contact
with the border.
      With this program, it is possible to doublecheck for this
habit-pattern situation. Whenever the creature is moving freely
across the screen, strike the D key. This will put the system into
the disturb mode of operation. But, you don’t want to disturb it
right now, so respond to the request for a motion code by entering
the one just printed on the screen. This won’t change anything as
far as the creature’s routine is concerned. Respond to the inquiry
about clearing the memory by specifying no memory clearing.
     After all this, the only difference will be that the score is
cleared to zero. And, if the creature has picked up its habit pattern
of motion, you will find the score running consistently at 1.00.
Entering a motion code that is the same as the current one is always
good for resetting the score.
      Once the creature has picked up its habit pattern, strike the D
key and enter a motion code different from the current one. Do not
specify a memory clear. K the creature has encountered your
“disturbance” before, the scoring will run at 1.00. You didn’t really
upset it at all, and it soon picks up its old habit pattern again.
      But, if your “disturbance” represents an entirely new motion
code, you will see the score starting out at a relatively low point.
Yet sometimes it runs at 1.00 for a couple of contacts and then
shoots downward. It all depends on how lucky the creature is.
      In any event, the creature soon picks up a habit pattern. The
new pattern often has the same general characteristics as the old
one, tending to move in a clockwise direction, for instance. At
other times, the critter picks up the very same pattern. And every
once in a while, your disturbance forces the creature to work out an
entirely different pattern.
      Give the little guy a chance to adjust to your disturbance
before hitting it with another. You will see that the creature tends
to be disturbed for a shorter duration as you continue disturbing it.

196


===== PDF PAGE 199 =====

    Table 1M. Phase Number and Corresponding Disturbance Motion Codes.

 PHASE NUMBER        DISTURBANCE       PHASE NUMBER           DISTURBANCE
                1                  J                  1                      J
        0     NONE      (INITIAL LEARNING
                               PHASE)
        1       -2                -2      13          0                      1
        2       -2                -1      14          0                      2
        3       -2                 0
        4       -2                  1     15              1                 -2
                                          16              1                 -1
        5       -2                  2     17              1                  0
        6       -1                -2      18              1                   1
        7       -1                -1      19              1                   2
        8       -1                 0
        9       -1                  1     20          2                     -2
                                          21          2                     -1
       10       -1                 2      22          2                      0
       11        0                -2      23          2                       1
       12        0                -1      24          2                      2


Keep at it long enough and the creature will not be thrown off the
track by any motion code you happen to enter.
     You can start out with a fresh creature by either doing a
DISTURB operation and responding with a clear memory option,
or doing a keyboard BREAK and then running the whole program
again from scratch. The only way to switch between ALPHA and
BETA creatures is by running the program from the start.

ADAPTIVE BETA-1 WITH SEMI-AUTOMATIC DISTURB
       This program does essentially the same task as the one just
 described in the previous section. Rather than entering the distur¬
 bance motion codes manually, however, the system automatically
 selects the codes for you. You still signal the time for a disturbance,
but the program cycles the new motion codes through all 24 pos¬
 sibilities for you. When you have cycled through all 24 distur¬
bances, you have the option of clearing the Beta memory and
 starting all over with a new creature, or restarting the sequence of
24 disturbances with the same creature.
      With one exception, the screen format is identical to the one in
the previous program. The difference is that this program displays
a PHASE number along with the usual scoring figures. The PHASE
number indicates which one of the 24 possible disturbances has
been executed. Table 11-1 shows the PHASE numbers and their
corresponding values of I and J used for upsetting the creature.
The program actually involves 25 phases. Phase 0 is the initial
learning phase.

                                                                            197


===== PDF PAGE 200 =====

Flowchart For Beta-1 With Semi-Automatic Disturbance
       The flowchart for this program, shown in Fig. 11-5, is practi¬
cally identical to the manual version in Fig. 11-3. The only real
differences are in the DISTURB sequence of operations. The
DISTURB conditional is satisfied only when you strike the D key.
Otherwise, operations continue as though the disturb feature does
not exist.
       Upon calling for the DISTURB operations, a counting vari¬
able, DT, is incremented at INCREMENT DISTURB PHASE.
This counter is initially set to 0 during the initialization part of the
program, and it is incremented each time you call for a disturbing
operation.
       According to the CYCLE DONE conditional, the DISTURB
subroutine (S. 1200) is called only when DT, the cycle counter, is
less than or equal to 24. If the 24th cycle has just been run, the
system goes to an INPUT operation asking whether or not you
want to proceed with the same memory or a new one. The SAME
MEMORY conditional then sends operations to the appropriate
point near the beginning of the program. In either case, the phase
counter is reset at RESTORE DISTURB CYCLE and the semi¬
automatic disturbance feature starts all over from PHASE 0 again.
       The DISTURB subroutine is quite different from its manually
operated counterpart in the previous program. This one selects the
values of I and J to be forced upon the creature, using the pattern
indicated in Table 11-1. Of course, the phase patterns in the
DISTURB subroutine are selected to avoid some of the invalid
conditions described in connection with the manual version in Fig.
11-4. There is no combination, for instance, where I and J are equal
to zero at the same time (motion-stopping code), and none of the
figures include fractional parts.
       This version of the DISTURB subroutine avoids the problem
of injecting motion codes, which cause unwanted contact situa¬
tions, by resetting the position of the creature on the screen. Each
time DISTURB selects a new motion code for testing the creature
 it also sets the creature figure near the center of the screen—no
 immediate contact situations are possible.
       Some experimenters might question the advisability of dis¬
turbing the creature’s position as well as its motion code. Studies
have shown that tinkering with the creature’s position on the
screen has little effect on its learning behavior. In fact, it rarely
upsets a BETA motion pattern. Such a disturbance might change
the relative position of the pattern on the screen, but it does not

198


===== PDF PAGE 201 =====

cause a significant disturbance of the basic learned behavior. The
proof and demonstration of this fact is left to you.
     So this version of DISTURB automatically picks a new motion
code for the creature, sets the creature near the middle of the
screen, sets the score to zero, and returns to the main program at a
point where the appropriate figures are redrawn on the screen (to
DRAW FIELD).




                                                                199


===== PDF PAGE 202 =====

Loading Beta-1 With Semi-Automatic Disturbance
     This program is loaded using your cassette-tape version of
ADAPTIVE PROGRAM WITH MANUAL DISTURB as a starting
point. The following subroutines can be used without any modifica¬
tions whatsoever:
S.450 BLINK (BLINK-1)
S.550DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.1000 SHOW MEMORY (SHOW MEM-1)
     The following three subroutines must be modified or, in the
case of S. 1200, rewritten completely:

S.500 HEADING (DIST HEAD-2)
S.800 UPDATE SCORE (UD DIST SCORE-1)
S.1200 DISTURB (DISTURB-2)
500 REM** DIST HEAD-1 **
505 CLS
510 PRINTTAB(20)‘'RODNEY ALPHA/BETA DISTURB”
512 PRINTTAB(20)“(SEMI-AUTOMATIC VERSION)”
515 PR1NT:PRINT‘‘ALPHA OR BETA MODE?”:PRINTTAB (10)”1 - ALP-
     HA”:PRINTTAB(10)‘‘2 - BETA”:INPUTMO
516 IFMO=1ORMO=2THEN520ELSE515
520 FORL=0TO6:PRINT:NEXT
525 INPUT‘‘DO ENTER TO START”;S$.RETURN

1200 REM** DISTURB-2**
1205-2,-2,-2,-1,-2,0,-2,1,-2,2,-1,-2,-1,-1,-1,0,-1,1,-1,2,0,
-2,0,-1,0,1,0,2,1,-2,1,-1,1,0,1,1,1,2,2,-1,2,-1,2,0,2,1,2,2
1210X=25:Y=25
1215READI,J
1225C=0;D=0:RETURN
800 REM ** UD DIST SCORE-1 **
805 U$=‘‘#.###”
810 ED/C
845 PRINT® 0, “DISTURB”
850 PRINT @ 15, “NO. CONTACTS”
852 PRINT® 35, “NO. GOOD MOVES”
853 PRINT® 55, “SCORE”
855 PRINT® 87, CiPRINT 100,D
857 PRINT® 64,DT”OF24”
860 PRINT® 119, USINGU$:E
865 RETURN

      The master programs are quite similar, and you can save
yourself a lot of time by revising the old one according to this
listing. Read through this listing very carefully, comparing it with
the version already residing in program memory. Make the neces¬
sary alterations and additions.

200


===== PDF PAGE 203 =====

12 Sf.'yil,* alpha/beta disturb master -2 ••
15 DIMM(5,5,2)
20GOSUB5
25 G0SUB6
30 F0R0=1T02:F0RN=1T05: M(M,N,0)=3:NEXTM,N,0
33 RESTORE:DT=0
35CLS:GOSUB550
36 0NM0G0T037,38
37 POKE16325,65:GOTO40
38 POKE16325,66
40 X=X+l:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
45IFCO=1THEN65
50 GOSUB450:D$=INKEY$:IFD$<>“D”THEN40
55 DT=DT+1;IFDT>24THEN60
57 GOSUB1200:GOTO35
60 INPUT“RECYCLE SAME MEMORY (1=YES,2=NO)”:CM:IFCM=1THEN3
   3ELSE30
65 C=C+1
67IFMO=1THEN85
70M|:£H-3:MJ=J+3
75 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
8OIP(RI=3)AND(RJ=3)=-1THEN85ELSE90
85 GOSUB450;GOSUB650:IFMO=1THEN90
87 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
90l=RI-3:J=RJ-3
95 GOSUB725
100 IFCO=1THEN120
105 D=D+1:GOSUB800
110 IFMO=2GOSUB1000
115GOTO40
120 C=C+1:G0T085

      If you have used the manual version of this program, as
described in the previous section of this chapter, you will find
yourself on familiar ground with this semi-automatic version. The
events proceed in much the same fashion, the only difference being
that the newer version is much easier to use (but you lose control
over which disturbance code is entered when you strike the D key).




Fig. 11-6. Adaptive curve for one BETA creature subjected to a 24-phase
disturbance cycle.


                                                                   201


===== PDF PAGE 204 =====

Getting Some Tangible Results

     While it might be fun and interesting (even exciting) to watch
the BETA creature adapting to new environmental conditions and
learning to adapt more readily with experience, it is difficult to
make a good scientific case without some really tangible evidence;
this means using the PHASE and SCORE figures to build a graph.
Such a graph is shown in Fig. 11-6.
     This graph was compiled for a single BETA creature which
was run through the initial learning phase and all 24 disturbance
test phases. The program was allowed to run for about 25
contacts, and then I struck the D key to cause a disturbance test.
After letting the creature adapt for another 25 contacts, I hit the
D key again. All along the way, I wrote down the scores at
contacts 5 and 25 and then plotted the results.
     You will never get the same graph twice, but you ought to
consider some of the features of this one. Learning to interpret
such graphs is just about as important as making them in the first
place.
     Notice in Fig. 11-6, for example, that this creature was not at
all upset by introducing the motion codes at Phases 1 and 2. It
continued learning through Phase 1 and didn’t budge from a perfect
score of 1.0 through Phase 2. You can see from the figure how the
creature adapted and reacted to the various changes. Run a few of
these experiments for yourself. It isn’t an easy task and it demands
your full attention through all 25 phases of the experiment. If you
allow 25 contacts between each disturbance test, one complete
cycle will require between 45 minutes and an hour.
      Since no two BETA creatures deal with their environment in
exactly the same fashion, no two adaptation graphs will be exactly
the same. After making up several of them, you will note, however,
a general trend. The scoring is usually quite erratic through the
first 10 or 12 phases and then smooths out at a very high level
through the end of the experiment. Every once in a while, though, a
critter will show some violent reactions in one or two of the later
phases, but you’ll find that is an exception to the general trend.
      Gathering and compiling the data in this fashion amounts to a
lot of time and work on your part. Unless you average together the
results of a lot of such experiments, you are going to have trouble
making a sound case for the creatures’ adaptive qualities. Thus,
there is a need for a program that does the experiment for any
number of creatures and compiles the results for you.

202


===== PDF PAGE 205 =====

COMPILING BETA-CLASS ADAPTATION CURVES

      The objective of this program is to provide the data necessary
for drawing Beta-Class adaptation curves. The job could be done by
hand, as described in the previous section of this chapter, but the
time and attention required surpasses reasonable bounds. So this
program gathers all the data for you, averages the results, and
tabulates the scores. All you have to do after that is transfer the
tabulated data to a graph.
      As in the case of all previous compiling programs, you are
asked to enter the number of creatures that are to participate in the
experiment. The larger the number of creatures, the more signifi¬
cance the final results will be.
      The program initializes a creature, gives it 25 contacts with
the border figure to pick up some experience, then it injects the
first motion-code disturbance. The creature is allowed to work at
the situation for 25 more contacts with the program recording the
NO. GOOD MOVES figure at contacts 5 and 25 in that series. The
program then injects a different motion-code disturbance, and the
creature is allowed to fight its way through another 25 contacts. As
before, the number of good moves is recorded at contacts 5 and 25.
      This procedure continues through all 24 of the possible
motion-code disturbances. NO. GOOD MOVES at contacts 5 and
25 are saved through each one of the 25 disturbance cycles. The
score, by the way, is set to zero at the beginning of each new
disturbance phase.
      So when the creature has been cycled through its initial learn¬
ing phase and 24 disturbance phases, 48 pieces of data are stored in
the compiling memory—NO. GOOD MOVES for contacts 5 and 25
for 24 disturbance phases.
      If the system is running more than one creature, the Beta
memory is then cleared and a new creature is started. Through this
second creature’s disturbance cycles its NO. GOOD MOVES is
summed with that of the previous creature. After the second
creature survives 24 disturbance phases, the Beta memory is
cleared and the next creature is created.
      This cycle continues until the number of creatures you
specified at the beginning of the experiment have all run their
course. Then the program processes all the compiled
information—the NO. GOOD MOVES summed for all creatures at
contacts 5 and 25 through the 24 disturbance phases.
      The system divides each of these 48 sums by the number of
creatures run in the experiment and prints out the results. The

                                                                 203


===== PDF PAGE 206 =====

results, in this case, are a set of 48 numbers representing the
average creature scores through the 24 disturbance cycles. See an
example in Fig. 11-7A. This information is then quite adequate for
drawing up the adaptation curve in Fig. 11-7B.
     While the curve in Fig. 11-7B appears to be rather erratic,
there is a discemable trend in the adaptive ability. As suggested
earlier in this chapter, the creatures tend to become more profi¬
cient at handling new circumstances as their experience with such
circumstances grows. In short, the more you disturb a Beta-Class
creature, the better it handles the problems you give it.
     Figure 11-7C is a smoothed version of the graph in Fig. 11-7B.
The smoothed version rather clearly shows the adaptive trend.
Bear in mind, however, that statistical curve-smoothing
techniques provide curves that are no more statistically reliable
than the original data. And the original data in this case was
developed from an experiment involving just 10 creatures.
     If you decide to run this compiling experiment for a hundred
creatures or more, you can bet that the “unsmoothed” curve would
be a lot smoother and more reliable in a statistical sense. There
might not even be a need to do a curve-smoothing operation.
     So why not run this experiment for a hundred creatures or
more? There’s just one good reason: Each creature requires be¬
tween 45 minutes and an hour to go through its paces. This figures
out to something on the order of 4 days of around the clock
computer time. If you can afford to tie up your computer for a block
of time this large, you ought to run the experiment for a hundred
creatures.
     In any event, the trend in Fig. 11-7 is clear. This business of
running the experiment for a hundred creatures is more a
philosophical point than a practical one.
Flowchart for Beta Adaptation Compile
     The flowchart for this program is shown in Fig. 11-8. It ought
to seem rather familiar in a number of respects. You can, for
example, find elements of BETA-I BASIC running through it and,
of course, there are also some blocks already described in connec¬
tion with earlier compiling program.
     There is something else about this flowchart that might be
equally apparent: Many of the standard subroutines are missing.
There are no BLINK and SHOW MEMORY operations, for exam¬
ple. When you get a chance to look over the listings, you will find
that the usual subroutines, in many cases, have been greatly
shortened.

204


===== PDF PAGE 207 =====

Fig. 11-7. Results of running 10 BETA creatures through the BETA
ADAPTION COMPILE program. A. Tabulated results from the computer.
B. Adaption curve resulting from plotting the raw results. C. Adaptation
curve resulting from curve-smoothing the same results.

                                                                   205


===== PDF PAGE 208 =====

     The reason for skipping some of the standard subroutines and
shortening up some of the others is rather simple. This is an
extensive program, and it is necessary to cut out a lot of operations
in order to get it to fit into a 4K memory.
     The SHOW MEMORY was one of the first subroutines that
had to be deleted. It never really played a vital role in previous
programs, and it would not contribute anything significant here,
either. A somewhat more costly trade-off concerns the elimination
of the BLINK subroutine. The purpose of this subroutine has
been to show the creature figure on the screen. You don’t really
have to see the creature; it will perform just as well if it is not
shown. And since the BLINK subroutine takes up some memory
space that is badly needed, it must go. Similar deletions applied
within the more necessary subroutines will become apparent
when you have to load them.
      Since you have worked with compiling programs and BETA-I
routines before, there is no need to describe this flowchart in great
detail. Some of the variables ought to be defined, though. Variable
C, as usual, is the contact counting variable, and variables I and J
are on-line motion-code variables. The number of good moves is
stored as variable D. There’s nothing new about any of these.
      DT is the disturb phase cycle counter. Whenever DT=0, for
example, the creature is executing its initial learning phase. And
when DT=1, it means the system is running the first disturb phase.
Note that the value of DT is incremented in the block labeled
DT=DT+1. The disturb phase is thus incremented at that point,
and the conditional DT greater than 24 looks for the final disturb
phase. If the conditional operation is not satisfied, it means the
disturbing operations aren’t complete, and you will see that opera¬
tions return to DRAW FIELD to begin a new disturb phase.
     TN is the creature counter. Each time the system completes
its series of 24 disturb cycles (conditional DT greater than 24 is
satisfied), TN is incremented to assign a number to the next
creature in the experiment.
      Variable CN is the number of creatures you specify to be run in
the experiment. That is actually done way back in the HEADING
operation. Whenever TN exceeds the value of CN, it is time to
terminate the runs and tabulate the data. Otherwise, the value of
TN is assigned to the next creature, TN is initialized at IN¬
ITIALIZE CREATURE, the previous creature’s memory is
cleared out at CLEAR MEMORY, and a new baby is launched into
the world.

206


===== PDF PAGE 209 =====

Fig. 11-8. Flowchart for BETA ADAPTATION COMPILE.

                                                    207


===== PDF PAGE 210 =====

     Figure 11-9 shows the screen format during the time the
experiment is being run. GREAT, shows the number of the crea¬
ture being run at the moment (TN) and the total number to be run in
the experiment (CN). The PHASE figure indicates which one of the
25 phases is being run at the moment (DT).
Loading Beta Adaptation Compile
     In this particular case, you will come out ahead by loading this
entire program from scratch. There are simply too many changes
and additions to make it feasible to build it around an earlier
program.
     These three subroutines are the only ones identical to earlier
versions:
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE
S.550 DRAW FIELD
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)

You can find the listings for these subroutines in the composite
listings for BETA-I WITH SEMI-AUTOMATIC DISTURBANCE
at the end of this chapter. Load them as they are shown there.
Next, type in the following 5 subroutines and master program:

500 REM ** DIST HEAD-3 **
510 CLS:PRINTTAB{15)“RODNEY BETA DISTURB COMPILE”
517 INPUT‘‘HOW MANY CREATURES”:CN;RETURN
800 REM     UD DIST SCORE-1 **
805 U$=‘‘#.###”
810 E=D/C
815 PRINT® 0 ,‘‘CREAT.”:PRINT @ 10,“PHASE”
850 PRINT @18,“NO. GOOD MOVES”
853 PRINT@55,“SCORE”
855 PRINT@87,C;PRINT 108,D
857 PRINT® 64,TN“OF”CN:PRINT@74,DT
860 PRINT@119,USINGU$:E
865 RETURN
875 REM ** DIST COMP DATA-1 **
877 TN=TN-1:U$=“#.##”
880 DT=1
886 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)‘‘LONG-TERM AVERAGES” :PRINT‘‘PHASE”,
     “CONT 5”,CONT 25"
890 PRINT:PRINTDT::PRINTTAB916)USINGU$; (T(DT,1)-h TN/ (TN*5);:
     PRINTTAB(32)USINGU$;(T(DT,2)-f-TN)/(TN*25)
892 INPUTS$:DT=DT-»-1:IFDT>
     24THEN880ELSE886
900 REM •• DIST COMP-1 •*
915 IFDT=0THEN945
920 IFC=5THEN935
925 IFC=25THEN940
930IFC< 25RETURN
935 T(DT,1)=T(DT,t)-f-D;
    RETURN

208


===== PDF PAGE 211 =====

 940 T(DT,2)=T(DT, 2)+D
 945 GOSUB1200;RETURN
1200 REM** DISTURB-2 **
1205 DJ=DJ+1 :IFDJ=0ANDDI=0THEN1205
1210 IFDJ 2THEN1215ELSE1220
1215DJ=-2:DI=DI+1
1220 l=DI:J=DJ:X=25:Y=25
1225C=0:D=0:RETURN


For the sake of future reference, these subroutines will be called:

S.500 HEADING (DIST HEAD-3)
S.800 UPDATE SCORE (UD DIST SCORE-t)
S.875 DISPLAY RESULTS (DIST COMP DATA-1)
S.900 COMPILE (DIST COMP-1)


The master program is as follows:
10 REM ** BETA DISTURB COMPILE MASTER **
15DIMM(5,5,2):DIMT(24,2)
2OTN=1:GOSUB500
25 GOSUB600
30 F0R0=1T02:F0RN=1T05:F0RM= T05:M(M,N,0)=3:NEX                    TM.N.O
35 DT=0:DI=-2:DJ=-3
4OCLS:GOSUB550




         GREAT     PHASE   NO. CONTACTS   NO GOOD MOVES   SCORE

         1 OF \m     1         10                  9       0.900




Fig. 11-9. Screen format while running BETA ADAPTION COMPILE.


                                                                      209


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====

45 X=X+l:Y=Y+J;GOSUB725
50 IFCO=1THEN60
55 G0T045
60 C=C+1 :IF(DT=0AND C > =25) OR(DT > 0AND((C=5ORC =25))THEN
   65ELSE70
65 GOSUB900;IFC=OTHEN110
70 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
75 IFNOT(RI=3ANDRJ=3)THEN85
80 GOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
85 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725
90 IFCO=1THEN100
95 D=D+1 iGOSUB 800:GOTO45
100 C=C+1 :IF{DT=0ANDC>=25)OR(DT>0AND((C=5ORC=25))THEN
    105ELSE80
105 GOSUB900:IFC <> 0THEN80
110 DT=DT+1 :IFDT<=24THEN40
115 TN=TN+1 :IFTN <=CNTHEN25
120 GOSUB875
Preliminary Tests for Beta Adaptation Compile
     This program ought to be thoroughly checked before commit¬
ting it to a long-term experimental run. The slightest error can
mean many, many hours of wasted computer time.
     Start out by running the program and entering a 1-creature
experiment. If all goes well, you should see the phase numbers
changing each time the NO. CONTACTS figure reaches 25. About
an hour later (after the 24th cycle is done), you ought to see this
message on the screen:
                     LONG-TERM AVERAGES
           PHASE            CONT 5            CONT25
           1                0.85              0.95
           ?—


     There is not enough memory space available in a 4K personal
computer system to bring out the entire results at one time; so
you see the results, one phase at a time. This example shows the
results for PHASE 1. In this particular case, the SCORE at contact
5 (CONT5) is 0.85, and the SCORE at the 25th contact was 0.95.
     To see the results for PHASE 2, and all subsequent phases,
simply strike the ENTER key. Incidentally, the display returns to
Phase 1 after showing Phase 24. This little Tound-and-’round
feature lets you doublecheck all the information wi±out running
the risk of loosing it by accident.
     If it all works out, run the experiment again, entering 2
creatures this time. The idea is to make sure the system averages
the results properly. Then take a break for a couple of hours whil
the program does its job.

210


===== PDF PAGE 213 =====

     You know the testing phase is done when the averages for
Phase 1 appear on the screen. Check through all the averages,
making sure they are “reasonable.’’ None of the averages should
exceed 1.00, for instance, and, of course, there should be no
negative numbers or, for that matter, any scores much lower than
0.30 or so.

COMPOSITE LISTINGS
Adaptive Program With Manual Disturb Listing
10 REM ** ALPHA/BETA DISTURB MASTER ♦♦

15 DIMM(5»5r2)

20 G0SUB500

25 GOSUB600

30 F0R0=lT02:F0RN=lT05:F0R«=lT05:M(M»Nf0)=3:NEXTMfNfO

35 CLS:GOSUB550

36 ONMOGOT037»38

37 POKE16325f65:GOT040

38 POKE16325f66

40 x=x+i:y=y+j:gosub725

45 IFC0=1THEN65

50 GOSUB450:D$=INKEY^:IFD$<>“D"THEN40ELSEGOSUB1200

55 IFM0=1THEN35

60 INPUT" WANT NEW MEMORY < l=YESf 0*N0 )''?CM: IFCM=1THEN30ELSE35

65 C=C+1

67 IFM0=1THEN85

70 mi=i+3:mj=j+3

75 RI=M(MI»MJt1 ):RJ=M(MI»MJf2)

80 IF< RI=3 )AND(RJ=3 )-lTHEN85ELSE90

85 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:IFM0=1THEN90

87 M(MlfMJfl )=Ri:M(MIfMJ»2)=RJ

90 i=ri-3:j=rj-3

95 G0SUB725

100 IFC0=1THEN120


                                                           211


===== PDF PAGE 214 =====

105 D=D+1:GOSUB800

110   IFHO=2GOSUB1000

115 G0T040

120 C=C+1:GOT085

450 REM       BLINK-1 **

455 SET( X r Y ): SET( X+1»Y ) tRESEK X 7 Y ): RESEK X+1»Y )
460 RETURN

500 REM       DIST HEAD-1 *♦

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB(20 )“RODNEY ALPHA/BETA DISTURB"

515 print:print”alpha or beta M0DE?":PRINTTAB<10 )“1
       - ALPHA"JPRINTTAB( 10 )"2 - BETA":INPUTMO

516 IFMO=10RMO=2THEN520ELSE515

520 forl=oto6:print:next

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"JSStRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3*16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=:FlT0F2:P0KEFf 131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176;NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:POKEF7191;NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEF r191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL COMP-3 **

605 GOSUB650

610 X=RI+25:Y=R.J+25:GOSUB650

612 I=RI-3;j=RJ-3

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM ♦♦ FETCH NEW-1 »»

660 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND<5)

665 IFRI=3ANDR.J=3THEN660

670 RETURN


212


===== PDF PAGE 215 =====

725 REM *♦ CON SENSE-1 *»

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I ) IF0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINK X+SGN(I )»XP,Y+SGN< J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTtNEXT
745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i;RETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE-1

805 U$ = "*.##*‘*

810 E=D/C

850 PRINT(?15f"N0* CONTACTS"

852 PRINT@35r"N0. GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"

855 PRINTe87TC:PRINTei08»D

860 PRINTeil9,USINGU$»E

865 RETURN

1000 REM       SHOW MEM-1 »»

1010 U=16327

1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO=1T02

1020 POKEU»127+M(M»NfO)

1025 u=w+i:next:next:next

1030 RETURN

1200 REM ** DISTURB-1 *♦

1205 CLS:PRINT"CURRENT status;"tPRINT

1210 PRINTTAB(10 )"I="I;PRINTTAB(10 )"J="JtPRINTtPRINT

1215 INPUT"NEW I"?i;iNPUT"NEU

1220 IF( I=0ANDJ=0 )0R( lOINTC I ) )OR( I<-20RI>2 )OR< J<>INT( J ))
     0R(J<-20RJ>2)THEN123 0
1222 GOSUB725:iFCO=lTHEN1230

1225 c=o:d=o;return

1230 PRINT"INVALID VALUE ENTERED* TRY AGAIN":G0T01215
Beta-1 With Semi-Auto Disturbance Listing
10 REM ** ALPHA/BETA DISTURB MASTER

15 DIMM<5f5»2)


                                                              213


===== PDF PAGE 216 =====

20 GOSUB500

22 DC=0

25 GOSUB600

30 F0R0=1T021F0RN=1T05:F0RM=1T05 J M(M»N»0)=31NEXTM»N»0

33 RESTORE

34 F0RDT=1T024

35 CLS:G0SUB550

36 0NM0G0T037»38

37 POKE16325r65JGOT040

38 P0KE16325»66

40 x=x+i:y=y+j:gosub725

45 IFC0=1THEN65

50 G0SUB450:D$=INKEY$:iFDi<>’'D"THEN40ELSEG0SUB1200

55 NEXTDT

60 INPUT”RECYCLE SAME MEMORY ( l=YES>2=NO )"5CM:IFCM*1
   THEN33ELSE30

65 C=C+1

67 IFM0=1THEN85

70 mi=i+3:mj=j+3

75 RI=M( MlfMJrl ):RJ=M(MI»MJ»2>

80 IF( RI=3 )AND(RJ=3 )-lTHEN85ELSE90

85 G0SUB450:GOSUB650IIFM0=1THEN90

87 M( MlfMJrl )=Ri:M(MI»hJ»2 )=RJ

90 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3

95 G0SUB725

100 IFCO=1THEN120

105 D=D+1:G0SUB800

110 IFM0=2G0SUB1000
115 GOT040

120 C=Cfi:GOT085

450 REM ** BLINK-1

455 SET( XfY ):SET( X+1fY ):RESET(X^Y ):RESET( X+1»Y )


214


===== PDF PAGE 217 =====

460 RETURN

500 REM *# DIST HEAD-1 *»

505 CLS

510 PRINTTAB<20 )"RODNEY ALPHA/BETA DISTURB"

515 print:print"alpha or beta mode?":printtab( lo>“
    1 - ALPHA";PRINTTAB<10 )"2 - BETA"tINPUTMO

516 IFM0=10RMO=2THEN520ELSE515

520 F0RL=0T06 tPRINT:NEXT

525 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"JS$:RETURN

550 REM »» FIELD-1 **

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 forf=fitof2:pokef»13i:next

560 F0RF=F3T0F41POKEF f176;NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP641 POKEFf191tNEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ♦♦ INITIAL COMP-3

605 GOSUB650

610 X=R I +25: Y=R.J+25 :G0SUB650

612 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3

615   c=o:d=o
620 RETURN

650 REM         FETCH NEU-1 ♦*

660 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND( 5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN
725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 **
730 r0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)
735 IFPOINT(X+SGN( I )*XPtY+SGN< J )*YP )=-1THEN750
740 next:NEXT

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=l:RETURN

                                                      215


===== PDF PAGE 218 =====

800 REM He* UD SCORE-1 *#

805

810 E=D/C

845 PRINTeOf"DISTURB-

850 PRINT015f"NO. CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35»"N0. GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE-

855 PRINTe87»C:PRINTei08»D

 856 IFDC=0THEN860

 857 PRINT064fDT"OF 24"

860 PRINTeil9fUSINGU$JE

 865 RETURN

1000 REM ♦* SHOU MEM-1 **

1010 U=16327

1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO=1T02

1020 POKEUf1274M( M»N»0)

1025 w=u+i:next:next:next

1030 RETURN

1200 REM ** DISTURB-2 **

1205 riATA-2»-2»-2f-l»-2r0f-2»lr-2»2f-lf-2>-lf-lr-lf0 »
     “lrl»—lF2fO >-2 »—IfOflr 0 r2rl»-2flr-lTlfO»l>lfl»
      2»2?-2r2f-l92fOr2flf2f2
1210 X=25:Y=25

1215 READIfJ

1225 dc=i:c=():d=o:return
Beta Adaptation Compile Listing
10 REM ** BETA DISTURB COMPILE MASTER **

15 DIMM(5r5»2):DIMT(24f2)

20 TN=1:GOSUB500

25 G0SUB600

30 F0R0=1T02:F0RN=1T05:F0RM=1T05:M< MrN>0)=3:NEXTMfNf0

35 dt=o:di=-2:dj=-3


216


===== PDF PAGE 219 =====

 40 CLS:GOSUB550

 45 X=X+I;y=Y+J;G0SUB725

 50 IFC0=1THEN60

 55 G0T045
 60 C=C+1:IF(DT=0ANDC>*25)0R< DT>0AND(C*50RC*25))
    THEN65ELSE70
 65 GOSUB900:iFC=OTHEN110

 70 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:RI=mMI»MJfl );RsI=M(HI,MJr2)

 75 IFN0T(RI=3ANDRJ*3 )THEN85

 80 G0SUB650:H(MI»MJ>1)=RI:M(MI»MJ»2)=RJ

 85 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

 90 IFC0=1THEN100

 95 D=D+1JGOSUB800:GOT045
100 C=C+1:IF( DT=0ANDC>=25)OR< DT>0AND(C=50RC»25 ))
      THEN105ELSE80
105 GOSUB900:iFC<>OTHEN80

110 DT=DT+i:iFDT<=24THEN40

115 TN=TN+i:iFTN<=CNTHEN25

120 G0SUB875

500 REM ** BIST HEAD-3

510 CLS:PRINTTAB<15 )"RODNEY BETA DISTURB COMPILE"

517 INPUT"HOW MANY CREATURES"»CNtRETURN

-“50 REM ** FIELD-1 **
552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF==F3T0F4:P0KEFrl76:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM *)»( INITIAL COMP-3 **

610 G0SUB650:X=RI+25:Y=RJ+25

612 GOSUB650

615   i=ri-3:j=rj-3:c=o:d=o


                                                      217


===== PDF PAGE 220 =====

620 RETURN
650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1 ♦»
660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5)
665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN66<)
670 RETURN
725 REM ** CON SENSE-1
730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J )
735 IFPOINT( X+SGN( I )»XP»Y+SGN( J )»YP )=*-lTHEN750
740 NEXTtNEXT
745 C0=0:RETURN
750 co=i:return
800 REM ** UD DIST SCORE-1 »*
805 U$="*♦♦♦♦"
810 E=D/C
815 PRINTOO T"CREAT*"IPRINTSIO >■PHASE"
850 PRINTei8»"N0. CONTACTS"
852 PRINTe35f"NO. GOOD MOVES"
853 PRINT(?55f "SCORE"
855 PRINTe87fC:PRINTei08fD
857 PRINTe64»TN“OF"CN:PRINT074fDT
860 PRINT0119»USINGU$?E
865 RETURN
875 REM ** DIST COMP DATA-1 #»
877 TN=TN~i:U$="*.*#"
880 DT=1
886 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)"L0NG-TERM AVERAGES";PRINT"PHASE"
      ■CONT 5"f"C0NT 25"

890 PRINTtPRINTDT? tPRINTTABC16 )USINGU$J(T< DT»1 HTN )/
    ( TN#5)UPRINTTAB(32)USINC U$;( T(DTr2)+TN )/( TN»25 )

892 INPUTS$:DT=DT+1tIFDT>24THEN880ELSE886
900 REM      DIST COMP-1 *t

915 IFDT=0THEN945
920 IFC=5THEN935
925 IFC=25THEN940
930 IFC<25RETURN
935 T(DTrl )=T(DT 71 )+D: RETURN
940 T(DT»2)=T<DTr2)+D
945 G0SUB1200;RETURN
1200 REM      DISTURB-2 »*
1205 DJ=DJ+1;IFDJ=OANDDI=OTHEN1205
1210 IFDJ>2THEN1215ELSE1220
1215 dj=~2:di=di+i
1220 i=Di:j=rij:x=25:Y=25
1225 C=0:D=0:RETURN

218


===== PDF PAGE 221 =====

               Beta-ll And
               An Unexpected Discovery


 Restructuring a BETA-I scheme to fit the definition of aLevel-II
 mechanism isn’t a very difficult task, especially if you use the
 ALPHA-II programs as a starting point. Just as you built a basic
 BETA-I program from the ALPHA-I version, you will use the
 ALPHA-H programs from Chapter 8 to build up the BETA-II
 system described in this chapter.
      The idea is to give a BETA creature an extended sensory
 system, making it sensitive to the quality of different kinds of
 objects on the screen. The most important feature of the job is
 seeing how the Beta memory can be extended to include the
 additional sensory parameters.
      The first program in this chapter is simple a conversion de¬
monstration. It shows how you can use the flowchart for a
standard BETA program and rework the operations to fit an
entirely different programming scheme. Specifically, these
BETA-II programs use the faster POKE and PEEK graphics in
place of the slower SET and RESET versions used for all Level-I
programs in this book.
      The first program is listed as a BETA-II program, but it really
does not include provisions for making it behave any differently
from a BETA-I scheme. The potential for generating a BETA-II
mode of behavior is inherent in the system, however.
     The second program in this chapter lets the creature print
tracks wherever it moves on the screen. You will find that the
creature is insensitive to its own tracks, responding only to the
border figure. This is true Level-II activity, because the creature is
able to distinguish one of its own footprints from the border figure,
and respond appropriately.
     This program is actually the only proper sort of BETA trail¬
drawing scheme. You worked with a trail-drawing BETA-I pro¬
gram back in Chapter 10, but at that time, it was necessary to
violate some of the most important definitions of real robotics in

                                                                 219


===== PDF PAGE 222 =====

order to get the job done. This is a job for BETA-II, and you see
how it all works out a bit later in this chapter, without violating any
of the basic principles.
      The third program in this chapter clearly demonstrates
BETA-II learning and adaptive behavior. The screen is filled with
obstacles of different kinds, and the BETA creature responds as
though they are all the same sort of obstacle. The creature can
sense the presence of the obstacles, but cannot distinguish them
from the border figure.
      It might seem that building this third program is a waste of
time and effort. Why bother with a BETA-II creature that cannot
tell the difference between one object and another? I originally
devised the program because it represented the next logical step in
the evolution of BETA-II adaptive intelligence. At the time, it
seemed to be a rather routine matter brought about by logical
neccesity rather than desire to make a big leap forward in the
evolutionary scheme. And being a rather routine step, I thought Fd
merely file away the results in my personal file of experiments and
not bother to include it in this book. Something hapened a few days
later, however, that changed my casual perspective on the matter.
Nowadays, I am quite excited about the newly discovered signifi¬
cance of this second BETA-II program.
      Before attempting to explain its special significance, I must
describe the fourth program in this chapter. The fourth program,
yet another logical step in the evolutionary scheme, allows the
creature to sense the qualitative differences between the various
objects on the screen.
      The Beta memory is expanded so that the creature has a
memory of how it dealt with the various objects in the past. The
significant point is that the BETA-II creature can respond to one of
the objects in a fashion that is quite different from the way it
responds to the others. Each object on the screen plays a different
role in the creature’s activity. Exactly how the creature responds
to a contact situation depends upon which object is involved in that
particular contact.
      Like BETA-I creatures, these BETA-IIs soon set up a certain
habit pattern of motion. The obstacles included within the border
figure play important roles in the configuration of each creature’s
basic habit pattern.
      I expected that to happen, but little more than that. However,
it didn’t take long to find out that BETA-II creatures respond to
disturbance operations in a fascinating (and wholly unexpected)
way. Whenever a BETA-II is first allowed to establish its habit

220


===== PDF PAGE 223 =====

pattern of motion and then disturbed, it tends to go back to that
same pattern—even at the same place on the screen!
     It turns out that BETA-II creatures are goal-seeking crea¬
tures. I had not expected to observe any goal-seeking activity with
anything less than a GAMMA-II. Let the critter extablish its habit
pattern, move it somewhere else on the screen, and launch it with
any motion code. It seeks out the original habit pattern and the
same general place in the “room"’ it worked before.
     Occasionally, the creature responds to a disturbance by set¬
ting up a new habit pattern somewhere else on the screen. And
sometimes it works its way to the original position on the screen,
but adds a couple of flourishes to the motion pattern. More often
than not, however, the creature find its way to the original position
on the screen and executes the very same habit pattern of motion.
     The third program in this chapter became important after I
noted the goal-seeking success of the creature built from the fourth
program. Using the third program, the habit-pattern, goal-seeking
features are present, but the creature isn’t always so successful in
carrying them out. In this case, a disturbance is just about as likely
to create a new habit pattern at a new place on the screen.
     The lesson to be learned from comparing the third and fourth
programs in this chapter is that the ability to discern the differences
between different objects, respond to each of them in a unique
fashion, and remember all the responses, gives the creature an
apparent appreciation for where it is located in the “room.” The
creature uses its knowledge of the different objects as cues to its
location.
     By way of comparison, a creature that is unable to distinguish
the various objects from one another (as in the third program)
cannot take positional cues from those objects, and thus owes no
particular allegiance to playing in one special part of the screen.
     If you have been schooled in traditional machine control
technology, I think you will be able to appreciate the power and
elegance of these notions. Just look around at other so-called
“robots” capable of keeping track of their position in the environ¬
ment. You run into things such as expensive stepping motors,
elaborate pattern-recognition schemes, and, above all, very
sophisticated logic, control, and memory systems.
     All a BETA-II machine has to be able to do is sense contact
with an object, determine the unique properties of that object, and
then remember what action it took to get away from it. If you trick
the machine by moving one of its cue objects, it will be upset

                                                                  221


===== PDF PAGE 224 =====

temporarily, of course, But it will adapt to the situation in some
way, attempting to set up a new habit pattern of motion or wander¬
ing around until it stumbles across the object you moved out of
place.
     Take an ordinary “robot” and disturb its environment in a
similar way, and the thing gets all out of whack. The elaborate
“room plan” stored in its memory no longer serves the proper
purpose—at best, it will turn away from an object that no longer
exists in its path. At worst, the mismatch between the original
surroundings (stored in memory) and the new surroundings causes
the machine to run completely out of sync with its environment.
You then are the victim of those nasty little cartoons and comedy
routines that portray robots as mindless critters which execute a
certain activity entirely inappropriate to the situation at hand.

BETA-lt CONVERSION DEMO
    The practical significance of this BETA-II CONVERSION
DEMO program is to set up a working base for loading the more
elaborate BETA-II programs. The educational side of the matter is
showing how an entirely different programming format can be
adapted to an existing flowchart.

Flowchart for BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO
      Figure 12-1 shows the flowchart for this program. Comparing
it with the flowchart for ALPHA-II CONVERSION DEMO (Fig.
8-1), you will find the changes are quite consistent with those found
by comparing flowcharts for ALPHA-I BASIC (Fig. 3-2) and
BETA-I BASIC (Fig. 9-1). In short, the main difference between
the ALPHA-II and BETA-II flowcharts are the memory operations
required for the latter version.
      The BETA-II process begins in the usual BETA-like
fashion—dimensioning the Beta memory space, doing a short
HEADING routine, initializing the Beta memory, drawing the
border figure, and initializing the position and motion of the crea¬
ture. Upon sensing contact with the border figure (remember this
program does not include obstacles within the border figure), the
program increments the NO. CONTACTS counter, saves the cur¬
rent values of I and J (the motion code), reads the contents of the
Beta memory (using the current motion code as the address), and
then checks to see if the situation has been dealt with in the past.
      If creature has dealt with the situation in the past, the BE¬
FORE conditional is satisfied and the system decodes the motion

222


===== PDF PAGE 225 =====

Fig. 12-1. Flowchart for BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO.


                                                    223


===== PDF PAGE 226 =====

code stored at that address location. The motion code is then tested
by a second CONTACT conditional. If there is no contact, the
stored response is a good one; D=D+D increments the NO.
GOOD MOVES figure, UPDATE DISPLAY shows the new scor¬
ing figures, and SHOW MEMORY prints the Beta memory map
along the bottom of the screen. As usual, the MOVE operation sets
the creature to its new position on the screen, and control returns
to the first CONTACT conditional to begin the process all over
again.
     The only time the Beta memory is altered is when the situa¬
tion leads the program to the LOAD MEMORY step. This can
come about in two ways: finding a contact situation that has not
been encountered before (BEFORE conditional \snot satisfied) and
when a previous stored contact response fails to work for some
reason (the second CONTACT conditional is satisfied.)

Loading BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO
    Since this program is an extension of ALPHA-II CONVER¬
SION DEMO, it’s a good idea to load the older program into the
computer first. The following subroutines carry over from
ALPHA-n CONVERSION DEMO with no changes at all:

      S.400 MOVE (MOVE 11-1)
      S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD II-1)
      S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL 11-1)
      S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW 11-1)
      S.725 CONTACT (CONSENSE 11-1)

     Delete S.450 BLINK (BLINK II-1) at lines 450 and 455. This
subroutine is omitted from the BETA-II programs for the sake of
picking up a bit more program memory space, a move that is quite
necessary for 4K computers. To complete the job, add or revise the
following master program and subroutines:



10 REM ** BETA-II MASTER 1**
15CLS: DIMM(5,5,2);GOSUB5 0:FORM=1TO5: F0RN=1T05 :FORO=1
   T02:M(M,N, 0)=0:NEXTO,N,M:GOSUB550;GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN50
25 C=C-l-1:MI=l-l-3:MJ=J-l-3: RI=M(MI,MJ,1);RJ=M(MI,MJ,2):IFNOT(RI=0
   AND RJ=0)THEN 35
30 GOSUB650 :M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2 =RJ
35 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN45
40 C=C-I-1:GOTO30
45 D=D-l-1:GOSUB 800:GOSUB1000
50 GOSUB400:GOTO20

224


===== PDF PAGE 227 =====

500 REM **HEAD BII-1 **
505CLS: PRINTTAB (25)“BETA-II”:PRINTTAB (20)“CONVERSION DE-
    M0”:F0RL.=1T08:PRINT:NEXT:INPUT“D0 ‘ENTER’ TO START”;S$:
    CLS: RETURN
800 REM *♦ UD SCORE 11-1 **
8O5PRINT@0, “NO. C0NTACTS”:PRINT@25,“N0 GOOD MOVES’’
    :PRINT 50, “SCORE”
810 PRINTS70,C:PRINT@95,D:PRINT@115,USING“#.##”:D/C;RETURN
1000 REM SHOW MEM 11-1
1005 W=16327;F0RM=1T05:F0RN=1T05:F0R0=1T02
1010 POKEW, 127-l-M(M,N,0):W=W-HI :NEXTO,N,M
1015 RETURN
      It is a good idea to avoid the temptation of testing any part of
this program until it is entered in its entirety. The use of so many
POKE statements brings up the possibility of POKEing into the
program memory space and making a hopeless jumble of every¬
thing. Doublecheck your listing against the composite version at
die end of this chapter. Aside from looking for possible errors, look
for lines that can be deleted. When you are satisfied the program is
correct, save it on cassette tape before running it. Thus, if there are
any errors in the POKE statements, the fact that the program
becomes garbled will not make it necessary to enter the whole
thing from scratch again.
What to Expect From BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO
     In most respects, this program runs just like BETA-I BASIC.
The creature works at the environment until it establishes a habit
pattern of motion. When this occurs, you will find that the memory
map no longer shows any changes and the SCORE figure rises
steadily toward perfection.
     The most notable difference will be the higher speed of opera¬
tion, an effect created by using the faster POKE graphics.
      Since this is a rather basic and foundational program, there are
no provisions for disturbing the creature’s activity. The only way to
break up an established habit pattern of motion is to strike the
BREAK key and run a whole new creature from the start.
BETA-II WITH TRAIL DRAWING
     This program is a small variation of BETA-II CONVERSION
DEMO. It simply allows the creature to leave behind a set of
“footprints” wherever it goes on the screen. You can erase the
existing trail anytime you wish, however, and that makes it possi¬
ble to view the habit pattern of motion quite clearly.
     With the program for BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO in your
computer’s program memory, make the following modifications to
the main program and subroutines S.400 and S.500:

                                                                  225


===== PDF PAGE 228 =====

10 REM ** BETA-II MASTER 2 **
15 CLS:DIMM(5,5,2):GOSUB500FORM = 1 TO 5: FORM =1 TO 5:FORO
   =1TO2:M(M,N,O)=O:NEXTO.N.M:GOSUB55O:GOSUB600
20 G0SUB725:IFC0=320RC0=42THEN5
25 C=C+3:MJ=J-l-3;RI=M(MI,MJ.1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2):IFN0T(RI= 0 AND
   RJ=0)THEN35
30 GOSUB650 M{MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
35 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725:IFC0=320RC0=42THEN45
40 C=C+1 :GOTO30
45 D=D+1:GOSUB8OO:GOSUB1000
50 GOSUB40 :IFINKEY$0 “T”THEN20
55 CLS:C=O:D=O:GOSUB550:GOTO20

400 REM  MOVE BII-2
405 POKENP,42:NP=NP+I+64*J:POKENP,140:RETURN

500 REM *♦ HEAD BII-2 **
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“BETA-H”:PRINTTAB(20)“TRAIL-DRAWING VER¬
SION
510 PRINT:PRINT“STRIKETHE T KEY TO ERASE THE EXISTING TRAIL”
515 FORL=1T04:PRINT:NEXT:INPUT‘‘STRIKE THE ‘ENTER’ KEY TO
START”;
S$;CLS;RETURN
      Load the whole works onto cassette table before attempting to
run the program. When you do run the program, you’ll find the
creature figure leaving behind an asterisk “footprint. ” This particu¬
lar effect is created by the MOVE operation. Rather than erasing
the creature figure before printing it in its new position, the POKE
NP,42 statement in line 405 replaces the old creature figure with an
asterisk. The little critter thus moves around its environment,
leaving behind a trail of asterisks.
      Of course, there is a very good chance that the trail will appear
complicated and confusing through the first 20 contacts or so. But
sooner or later the creature picks up a habit pattern of motion that
carries it through the same path again and again.
      To see the habit-pattern trail, without all the confusion gener¬
ated during the initial learning phase, simply strike the T key.
According to line 55 of the master program (BETA-II MASTER 2),
this clears the screen, zeroes the score, redraws the border figure
and returns operations back to line 20. Since the old set of tracks
are eliminated along with everything else during the CLS opera¬
tion, it figures that any new tracks will belong to the habit pattern of
motion.
      At the time of this writing, no one has yet generated a formal
experimental study of BETA-II habit patterns. Someone ought to
take the time to run this program any number of times, drawing and
classifying the different kinds of habit patterns.

226


===== PDF PAGE 229 =====

    NO CONTACTS       NO GOOD MOVES         SCORE           FIG.
    42                 38                     0.90           »




Fjg. 12-2. Flowchart for BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES AND MANUAL DIS¬
TURB.


BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES AND MANUAL DISTURB
      Now the fun begins. The screen format for this project, shown
in Fig. 12-2, includes a set of four obstacles within the border
figure. The creature’s sensory capability is extended to include
sensing the qualitative differences between the four obstacles as
well as the top, bottom, and sides of the border figure itself.
      The fact that the creature can sense the differences between
these objects is demonstrated by the FIG. heading at the upper
left-hand comer of the screen. As in the ALPHA-II experiments
you conducted earlier, the program displays the nature of the
obstruction in the creature’s path. In Fig. 12-2, it so happens that
the creature made contact wi± the percent-sign obstacle, and you
see a % drawn under the FIG. heading on the display.
      The creature for this program, however, is not equipped to
respond to the four extra obstacles in any way different from the
way it responds to the border figure. In a manner of speaking, the
creature thinks any one of the obstacles is simply some sort of
extension of the border figure. You will have a chance to change
that state of affairs in the last program in this chapter.
      As mentioned earlier, I had not originally planned to include
this program in the book. It seemed to be a fairly trivial extension of

                                                                   227


===== PDF PAGE 230 =====

the BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO, a necessary logical step, but
not a potentially interesting one. How wrong I was!
      It turns out that this program serves as an important contrast
to things you will observe in the last program in this chapter. So get
it into your machine, play with it for a while, and save it for future
reference. You will probably want to return to it again after finish¬
ing the last program for the BETA-II series.

Flowchart for BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES AND DISTURB
     Figure 12-3 is the flowchart for this particular program. It
differs from the BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO version in just
two respects. First, note the S.675 DRAW FIGS subroutine now
included in the start-up phase of the program. This subroutine is
the one responsible for drawing the four figures which serve as
extra obstacles for the creature. It ought to be a familiar subroutine
because it was used in some of the ALPHA-H programs in Chapter
8.
     The second difference is the DISTURB loop. Everytime the
creature is moved to a new position at the MOVE operation, a
DISTURB conditional checks to see whether or not you want to
disturb the creature’s activity. If not, operations return im¬
mediately to CONTACT. But, if you specify a disturbance by
striking the D key, the DISTURB conditional leads to a series of
three subroutines: DRAW FIELD, DRAW FIGS, and INITIALIZE
CREATURE.
      The disturbance loop actually begins with a CLS operation
which clears the entire screen. The main reason for doing this is to
remove the old creature’s image. In any case, the border figure is
redrawn, the figures (obstacles) are redrawn, and, most important
to the purpose of the operation, the creature is set to a new initial
position and given a randomly generated motion code.
     The idea is to start running a new creature, give it time to
establish a habit pattern of motion, and then disturb the pattern by
striking the enter key. The disturbance operation does not affect
the Beta memory in any way; when operations begin again, the
creature already has access to some learned information about its
surroundings.
      You will find that the creature adapts to the disturbance in one
of three ways: returning to the original habit pattern of motion,
building up a new habit pattern, or returning to the original pattern
at a different place or with some variations.

228


===== PDF PAGE 231 =====

Loading BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES AND DISTURB
     Load BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO into your machine and
then make the following additions and modifications:

 10 REM ** BETA-II MASTER 3 **
 15 CLS:DIM(5,5,2):GOSUB500:FORM=1TO5:FORN=1TO5: F0R0=1T02:
     M(M,N,0)=0:NEXTO.N,M:GOSUB550:GOSUB675:GOSUB600
  20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN50
 22 CI=CO
  25C=C+t:MI=:|-l-3:MJ=J-l-3R|=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)IFNOTRI=0
     ANDRJ=0THEN35                            v . . /
  RJ=0)THEN35
 30 GOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ
 35 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN45
 40 C=C+1 :GOTO30
 45 D=D+^ :GOSUB800:GOSUB1000
 50 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN55ELSE20
 55 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB675:GOSUB600:GOTO20
500 REM     HEAD BII-3 **
505 CLSPRINTTAB(25)“BETA-ll”:PRINTTAB(15)“AVOID FIGURES AND
     DISTURB”; FORL = 1T08:PRINT :NEXT :INPUT “DO ‘ENTER’ TO
     START”;S$;CLS:RETURN
800 REM ** UD SCORE II-2 **
805 PRINT @ 0,“NO. CONTACTS” :PRINT@ 20 ,“NO. GOOD MOVES”:
     PRINT 40,“SCORE”: PRINT @ 60 .“FIG.”
 810 PRINT @ 65C :PRINT@ 85 D :PRINT@105 USING “#. ##” ;D/C:
     PRINT® 125,CH R$(C1)
 815 RETURN

600 REM *♦ INITIAL 11-2 **
605 SF=0 :NP=15968:GOSUB6&0:l=RI-3:J=RJ-3
61OC=0:D=0:RETURN




Also add S.675 DRAW FIGS from Chapter 8. Doublecheck your
listing against the composite listing at the end of this chapter, save
the program on cassette tape, and then run it.
      The more often you disturb this creature’s activity, the more
often it shows scores of 1.00. If you want to speed up the action a
little bit, delete the GOSUB1000 statement in line 45 of the master
program. You’ll no longer see the memory map, but the deletion
eliminates the relatively long period of time required for updating
it.

BETA-II WITH INDEPENDENT RESPDNSES AND DISTURB
    This is the program that surprised me. It clearly shows goal¬
seeking behavior for a system I thought too simple for that sort of

                                                                 229


===== PDF PAGE 232 =====

Fig. 12-3. Flowchart for BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES AND DISTURB.

230


===== PDF PAGE 233 =====

activity. The program is an extension of the previous one. In this
case, three of the obstacles on the screen are treated as something
quite different from the other obstacles and the border figure. The
family of possible responses is the same, but the creature has an
extended memory that allows different sets of responses in each
case.
     The original purpose of the project was to show how the Beta
memory has to be expanded to cover the idea of having different
responses to different objects. You will see in the master program
the Beta memory is expanded to a 5x5x2x2, as opposed to the
smaller 5x5x2 for earlier BETA-II programs.
     It would be nice if the creature could make an independent set
of responses to all four different obstacles contained within the
border figure. However, that calls for a 5x5x4x2 memory dimen¬
sion which exceeds the limitations of a 4K memory system. So for
the sake of experimenters having smaller memory systems, the
obstacles built from 0s and %s are treated as part of the border
figure. Even then, you must do a CLEAR 16 before the program can
be run on a 4K system.
      You will be able to see the creature responding to the border,
#, and * figures with different motions, even though the contact
situations are otherwise identical.
      The unexpected, and now most important, feature of this
scheme is the way the creature uses the obstacles as cues to its
position on the screen. Nearly every time you disturb this creature
by striking the D key, you will find it working its way back to the
original screen position and habit pattern.
      Sometimes the creature works out a new position and habit
pattern, and sometimes the pattern is in the same position on the
screen, but with a few interesting variations. Nevertheless, one
gets the impression the creature is motivated to seek out a particu¬
lar position and pattern of motion. Considering you have not pro¬
grammed the machine to do that kind of task, you can be sure you
are seeing the seed of genuine machine adaptive intelligence at
work.

Flowchart for BETA-II With Independent Responses and Disturb
     The flowchart in Fig. 12-4 is quite similar to the one featured
in the previous section of this chapter. Notable differences are the
absense of a HEADING operation, an INITIALIZE MEMORY
step, and a SHOW MEMORY operation. These steps have been
eliminated so that the program fits into a 4K-computer format.

                                                                231


===== PDF PAGE 234 =====

Fig. 12-4. Flowchart for BETA-II WITH INDEPENDENT RESPONSES AND
DISTURB.

232


===== PDF PAGE 235 =====

     You probably have realized by now that the HEADING opera¬
tion in most of the programs is not really essential. It merely
serves as a convenient way to identify the program residing in the
system. SHOW MEMORY is eliminated here for a couple of
reasons: first, to allow more room for Beta memory, and second
because it is difficult to show the entire memory anyway. This
program runs with 5x5x2x2, or 100 Beta memory elements, as
opposed to 50 for earlier BETAs. SHOW MEMORY isn’t critical to
the operation.
     INITIALIZE MEMORY can be omitted because most compu¬
ter systems automatically initialize all memory elements to zero
upon executing the RUN command. So why bother with a special
INITIALIZE MEMORY operation when, in this case, you would
want the memory initialized with 0s anyway?
     One important addition to the flowchart is the EVALUATE
CONTACT operation. This step is responsible for sensing the
nature of the contact figure and setting a third element in the Beta
memory address. You see, the memory is not only addressed by
the I and J values of the motion code (as with all earlier BETA
programs), but the quality of the obstacle as well.
     So now there are three distinct elements in the memory
address: the current I value, the current J value, and a number
representing the nature of the obstacle: border, asterisk, or pound
sign. All other operations, including the DISTURBANCE phase,
are the same as those used with BETA-II WITH OBSTACLES
AND DISTURB.

Loading BETA-II With Independent Responses and Disturb
     This program is fairly easy to load if BETA-II WITH OBSTA¬
CLES AND DISTURB is already resident in program memory. You
have to delete some unnecessary subroutines, modify the master
program, and add just one new subroutine. Delete these from the
older program:
S.500 HEADING (lines 500-505)
S.1000 SHOW MEMORY (lines 1000-1015).
Then modify or add these:
10 REM     BETA-II MASTER 4 **
15 CLS:DIMM(5,5,2,2): GOSUB 550:GOSUB675:GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725IFCO= 32THEN50
22 Cl =00
25 C=C-f1:GOSUB900;MI=1-l-3:MJ=J-H3:RI=M (MI.MJ.B.I):
    RJ=M(MI,MJ,B,2): IFNOT(RI=0 ANDRJ = 0)THEN 35
30 GOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,B.1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,B,2)=RJ
35 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN45

                                                               233


===== PDF PAGE 236 =====

40 C=C+1 :GOTO30
45 D=D+1:GOSUB800
50 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN55ELSE 20
55 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB675:GOSUB600:GOTO20
900 REM ♦* CON EVAL BII-1 **
905 IFCO=131 ORCO=1760RC0=191THEN925
91OIFCO=-42THEN930
915 IFCO=35THEN935
925 B=0:RETURN
930 B=1:RETURN
935 B=2:RETURN
Doublecheck your entire listing against the composite version at
the end of this chapter. Load the program onto cassette tape, enter
a CLEAR 16, and you’re ready to go.
      The CLEAR 16 operation is absolutely necessary for comput¬
ers having less than 16K memories. Doing the CLEAR 16 shifts
most of the normal memory space allocated for string variables to
usable program space. Without doing the CLEAR 16 before run¬
ning this program, small computers will show an out-of-memory
error.
      There is no HEADING routine, so the program begins shortly
after you enter the RUN command. Watch the creature gradually
establi h a habit pattern of motion, then strike theZ) key to upset it.
In most instances you will see the creature working its way back to
the same position and habit pattern established earlier. Talented
little bugger, isn’t it?

COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS
BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO Listing
10 kEM ** BETA-ii HhSTER 1
15 cls:dimm(5»5f2);gosub5oo:form=ito5:forn=ito5;foro
   =^1T02:M( h»Nf0)=0:NEXT0rN» h:GOSUB550 iGOSUB600

20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN50

25 C=C+1:MI = I+3:MJ=J+3:RI=M(              ):RJ=h( HI»HJf2 >;
    IF N0T( RI=0ANDRJ=0)THEN35

30 GOSUB650:M(MlfMJfl)=RI:M( MIfMJ»2)=RJ

35 I=RI-3IJ=RJ-3:G0SUB725:IFC0=;^THEN45

40 C=C+1:GOT030

45 d=d+i:gosub80o:gosubiooo

50 GOSUB400:GOTQ20

400 REM ** MOOE II-l tt


234


===== PDF PAGE 237 =====

 405 POKENP»321NP=NP+I+64»J:POKENP»140:RETURN

 450 REM ** BLINK II-l

 455 POKENP»32:POKENP»140:RETURN

 500 REM ** head BII-1 »*

505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)"BETA-II":PRINTTAB(20 )"CONVERSION
     DEMO":forl=ito8:print;n
EXT:INPUT"D0 'enters to start-fS$:CLS:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131INEXT

560 F0RF==16193T016255:PQKEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64tPOKEF>191INEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL II-l

 605 SF=0:NP=15968:GOSUB650:I=RI-3;J=RJ-3:RETURN

 650 REM ** FETCH NEW II-l **

 655 RI=RND(5 ):R.J=RND( 5 ): IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

 660 RETURN
 725 REM      CON SENSE II-l

730 FQRSI=^ABS( I )TOiSTEP-i t FORSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SI*SGN( I )+64*S.J!tf.SGN( J >)

740   IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJtSItRETURN

800 REM *4 UD SCORE II--1

805 PRINTSOr"NO* CONTACTS" :PRINTe25»"NO* GOOD MOOES":
    PRINTeSOf"SCORE"
810 PRINTe70rC:PRINTe95»D:PRINTeil5rUSING"***4"»li/c:return

iOOO REM      SHOU MEM II-l **

1005 U=16327:FORM=:1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO=1T02

1010 P0KEUri27+M(MfN»o):u=w+i:nexto»n»m

1015 RETURN
BETA-II WITH TRAIL DRAWING Listing
  10 KEfi -fif bElA-ii iirtSTER 2 44
  15 CLS;LiIMM< 5t5>2 ;:&G5UB500 t F 0RM= 1T05 I F0RN = 1T05 t FORO
     -iT02:M( M»N»0 )=0 :NEXT0»N» M:&OSUB550 ;GOSUB600

                                                                      235


===== PDF PAGE 238 =====

20 GG3UB725:IFC0^320RCO=42THEN50

25 c=c+i:mi=i+3:m.j-j+3;ri=m( mii ):rj=m< mi»mj»2 )
   :iFN0T( RI = 0ANDRJ=0)THEN35

30 G03UB650;M(MI»MJ»1)=ri:m( MI?MJ»2)=RJ

35 I=:RI-3:.J = RJ-5: G03UB725: IFC0=320RCO=42THEN45

40 C=C+1:GOT030

45 D==D+1:GOSUB800:GOSUB100()

50 GOSUB400: IFINKEY$<>‘'T"THEN20

55 CLs;c=() :d=() :gosub55() :goto20

400 REM ** MOVE BII-2 ♦*

405 FOKENPf42:NP=NP+I+64*JJPOKENP»140:RETURN

500 REM ** HEAD BII-2 *#

505 CLS:PRINTTAB( 25 )-BETA-II*' :PRINTTAB(20 )"
    TRAIL-DRAWING VERSION

510 PRINT:PRINT”STRIKE the 'J'
    KEY TO ERASE THE EXISTING TRAIL"

515 forl=ito4:print:next;input"strike the
      'ENTER'   KEY TO START"fSitCLStRETURN

550 REM         FIELD Il-l **

555 F0RF=^15553T015615rP0KEFf 131:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:PQKEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF--=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF 1191JNEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64;P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL II-l **

605 SF=0:NF-15968tGOSUB650 tI=RI-3:J=RJ-3:RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW II-l

655 RI=:RND( 5 ):RJ=:RND( 5 ): IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

730 FORSI-ABS( I )TG1STEP-11FORSJ=ABS(J )T01STEF-1

735 CO^PEEKC NP + SI*vSGN( I )+644S.J>SGN( J ) )

740 IFC0<>32RETURN


236


===== PDF PAGE 239 =====

745 NEXTSJrSI:RETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE II-l

805 PRINT0Of"NQ» CONTACTS":PRINTe25f"NO. GOOD MOVES":
    PRINTBSOf"SCORE"

810 PRINT07()rC:PRINT095»D:PRINT0115»USING"#.#t-fD/C:RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM II-l **

1005 U=16327:fqrm=ito5:forn=ito5:foro=ito2

1010    POKEWfi27+M(MtN»o ):u=w+i:nexto»n»m
1015 RETURN

BETA-il WITH OBSTACLES AND MANUAL DISTURB Listing
10 Kti'l ^4 Jcic.lH-xi MAblER S

i5 CLS.Iiirirtv 5 r 5» 2 ; 1G0SUB50 w ; FORh^ 11 05 ; FORN= 11 U5
    ;foro^ ito2;m( m»n»o )=o;NEXTOFNr
     h;GDSUB550;G0SUB675iG0SUB600

20 GOSUB725;iFCO=32THEN50

22 Ci=^CO

25 C^C+1 ;MI = I+3:MJ=.J + 3:R1=M( MI»MJrl ):RJ=M( MIfM.J»2 )
    :IF N0T( RI=()ANLIRJ=0 )THEN35

30 GGSUB650:M( MI»M.J»1 )=^RI :M( MI rMJ »2 )=-RJ

35 I=-RI-3: J=RJ-3;G0SUB725: IFC0=32THEN45

40 C=C+1:GOT030

45 d=d+i:gosub8oo:gosubiooo

50 GOSUB400:iFINKEY$="D"THEN55ELSE20

55 CLS:GOSUB550:GOSUB675;GOSUB600:GOT020

400 REM ** MOVE II-l **

405 POKENP T 321NP=NP + IF64*J:POKENP f140IRETURN

450 REM ** BLINK II-l **

455 POKENP »32:POKENP f140 I RETURN

500 REM ** HEAD BII-3

505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25 )"BETA-II":PRINTTAB( 15)
       "AVOID FIGURES AND DISTURB"tF0RL=1T
       q8:print:next:input"do 'enter'to start"?s$:cls:return

550 REM        FIELD Il-l **


                                                                    237


===== PDF PAGE 240 =====

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255;P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191tNEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM *)J( INITIAL II-2

605 3F=0:NP=15968:G0SUB650 tI=RI-3:J=RJ-3

610 C=0;D=0:RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW II-l *♦

655 RI^RNIK 5 >:RJ = RND( 5 ):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM ** FIGS II-l **

677 P=15755

680 FORF^OTOl :F0RN=P+645»(FT0P+64#F+8;P0KEN»35:NEXTNfF

682 FORF=0TOl:FORN=P+32+64*FTOP+40+64»F:POKEN»48:NEXTNfF

684 F0RF=0T01 :FORN=P+192+64)|cFTOP+20O+64*F:POKENf42:NEXTN>F

686 F0RF=0T0i:F0RN=P+224+64*FT0P+232+64»F:P0KENf37:NEXTNfF
690 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

730 FORSI=ABS(I )T01STEP-1:F0RSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SI*SGN<I )+64#SJ»SGN(J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 nextsj»si;return

800 REM ** UD SCORE I1-2

805 PRINTeOf”NO. CONTACTS'* :PRINT02O r "NO* GOOD MOVES"
      :PRINT04O»"SCORE"JPRINTiA Or"FIG,"
810 PRINTe65TC^PRINTe85fD:PRINT01O5»USING’'*,*f"5D/C;PRINT
      0125fCHR$(Cl )
815 RETURN
1000 REM ** SHOW MEM II-l

1005 W=16327:F0RM=1T05:F0RN=1T05:F0R0=1T02

1010 P0KEW»127+M(MfN»0);u=w+i:nexto»n»m

1015 RETURN


238


===== PDF PAGE 241 =====

BETA-II WITH INDEPENDENT RESPONSE AND DISTURB Listing
 10 REM ** BETA-ii MASTER 4 **

 15 CLS:DIMM( 5f5r2r2 ):G0SUB55() ;G0SUB675;G0SUB600

20 GOSUB725:iFCO=32THEN50

22 C1=C0

 25 C=C+i:GOSUB900:MI=I-l-3:MJ=J+3JRI=mMI»MJ»Bf 1 ):rj=h
    < MIfMJ»B»2);iFN0T( RI*OAND
 RJ=0 )THEN35

 30 GOSUB650JM(MIfMJ>B»l )=Ri:M<MI»MJfBf2)=RJ

 35 I=RI-3:J*RJ-3:G0SUB725IIFC0=32THEN45

 40 C=C+1:G0T030

 45 Ii=D+1:GOSUB800

 50 GOSUB400IIFINKEY$="D"THEN55ELSE20

 55 CLS:GOSUB550 t G0SUB6751GOSUB600:GOT020

400 REM *» MOVE II-l

405 POKENPf32:NP=NP+I+64»JIPOKENP1140IRETURN

450 REM       BLINK II-l ♦»

455 P0KENPf32:P0KENP»140:RETURN

550 REM       FIELD II-l

555 FORF=15553T015615:P0KEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T0162551POKEF f176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM tt INITIAL II-2 **

605 SF=0:NP=15968;G0SUB650:I=RI-3:J=RJ-3

610 C=0:D=0:RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEW II-l **

655 RI = RND< 5 ):RJ=RND( 5 ):IFSF=0ANDRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM ** FIGS II-l **

677 F-15755


                                                            239


===== PDF PAGE 242 =====

680 F ORF=^0TOl :F0RN=P+64*FT0P+64»F+8:P0KEN»35:NEXTN*F

682 F0RF=-()T01 :F0RN=P+32+64*FT0P+40+64»F:P0KEN»48:NEXTN*F

684 F0RF=()T0i:F0RN=P+192+64#FT0P+200+64ltF:P0KEN»42:NEXTN»F

686 FORF==OTOi:FORN=P+224+64*FTOP+232+64*F:POKENf37:NEXTNfF

690 RETURN

725 REM      CON SENSE II-l tt

730 FORSI=ABS(I )T01STEP-11FORSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SI*SGN< I )+64*SJ|cSGN< J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJfSi:RETURN

800 REM      UD SCORE I1-2 t*

805 PRINTeOf"NO* CONTACTS":PRINTe20»"NO. GOOD MOVES’:
    PRINT»40f"SCORE":PRINTt6 0»"FIG."
 810 PRINT(?65»C:PRINTe85>D;pRINTei05rUSING"*.♦fJD/CtPR
     INTei25fCHR*(Cl)
815 RETURN

900 REM ** CON EVAL BII-1 tt

905 IFC0=1310RC0=1760RC0=191THEN925

910 IFC0=42THEN930

915 IFC0=35THEN935

925 b=o:return

930 B=1‘.RETURN

935 B=2tRETURN




240


===== PDF PAGE 243 =====

   13           A Return To BETA-i:
                With Confidence This Time

The BETA-II concepts presented in the previous chapter offer
some real challenges in the way of original experimental work and,
of course, some possibilities for nifty robot games. For our im¬
mediate purposes, it is time to get back onto the main evolutionary
track. The material in this chapter marks a return to the basic
BETA-I concept—an Alpha-Class machine outfitted with a Beta-
Class memory. You will find an entirely new feature injected into
the scheme, and this new feature paves the way for the next big
evolutionary jump to Gamma-Class behavior.

BETA WITH CONFIDENCE
     Suppose you are running an ordinary BETA-I program, not
necessarily a fancy compiling program, but just one of the basic
versions with scoring and memory showing. Recall that such a
creature sooner or later locks into a habit pattern of motion. The
SCORE figure rises steadily, the little memory map along the
bottom of the screen no longer shows any changes, and you might
even be able to trace the habit pattern as the BETA creature moves
around on the screen.
     Now suppose the creature is not only remembering responses
that work, but also counts the number of times each response
works. Sounds simple enough, doesn’t it? Well if that’s the case, it
figures that the responses taking part in the habit pattern of motion
are going to pick up some pretty large counts. Every time the
creature completes its excursion through a habit pattern, each of
the responses involved are counted or incremented, by one.
     In a manner of speaking, the creature picks up some confi¬
dence regarding the responses that work for it time and time again.
This confidence level is expressed by the counters that keep track
of the number of times a given response works. The more often a
certain response, or set of responses, works, the more confident
the creature becomes.

                                                                 241


===== PDF PAGE 244 =====

     But suppose something happens to upset the creature’s habit
pattern of motion. The confidence counters have accumulated
some large numbers because the responses worked so many times
before. The conditions are upset now, though, and suddenly one or
more of those “confident” responses don’t work right. What should
the creature do? How about having it execute that confident re¬
sponse again? If the response doesn’t work, it tries it again, and
again, and again.
      Every time the creature tries a “confident” response and it
doesn’t work, the confidence counter is decremented. The little
guy, you see, is losing confidence now. And when the confidence
counter for that particular response gets down to zero, the approp¬
riate action is to go after an Alpha-like random response. Eventu¬
ally the creature will pick a response that works, assign some
minimum confidence level to it, and go on from there. Every time
this new response works, the confidence level picks up.
      It takes between 20 and 30 contacts, on the average, for a
BETA creature to establish a high-confidence habit pattern of
motion. Once it gets there, it takes some work to find out that it no
longer works. The BETA creature with confidence must work at
breaking an old habit and establishing a new one.
     In the next program you are going to be building an ordinary
BETA-I creature, with a scheme inserted for counting the number
of times it deals with a given situation, both effectively and non-
effective ly. Each time a response works, it is stored in memory
along with a number representing the number of times that re¬
sponse works. The confidence numbers can go as high as four.
(There seems to be little gained by having them go any higher).
Each time a response does not work, the confidence level as¬
sociated with it is decreased by one, down as far as zero.
     On a simple BETA-I level, the effect of the confidence level
feature isn’t noticeable at first. In fact, if the creature adapts a
simple habit pattern of motion one that is never disrupted in any
significant way, the confidence effect will never show up. But,
when something happens to shake the creature’s confidence in
previously successful responses, you’ll find it banging its head
against the wall a number of times before it finally gives up and tries
something new.
    A BETA-I creature that does not have a confidence feature
owes no allegiance to a response that worked many times before. It
might have solved a particular problem in one particular way a
hundred times before, but the first time that same response doesn’t

242


===== PDF PAGE 245 =====

work, the critter is willing to chuck all past experience and try
something entirely new.
      BETA with confidence is simply more stubbom.If aresponse
to a particular situation worked before, the creature figures it will
work again. It insists it will work again until continued effort finally
shakes the confidence level down to zero, then it tries something
else. In the meantime, its SCORE figure plunges steadily down¬
ward.
      BETA creatures with confidence tend to show lower scoring
figures than creatures without the confidence feature. Both score
equally well until something happens to upset previously success¬
ful responses, and both recover from the disturbance at about the
same rate. The scoring for a BETA with confidence plunges much
 lower when its faith is shaken. Finding that a previously good
response no longer works is far more traumatic for a BETA with
confidence, and the scores reflect that fact.
      So why design a machine that seems to insist a certain re¬
sponse will work when, indeed, it no longer does? Why build in a
feature that causes traumatic responses that aren't really neces¬
sary for accomplishing the task at hand? Those are good questions
when they come from one trained in the traditional doctrines of
engineering and control technology. To become a successful
roboticist, however, one must be willing and able to set aside
conventional doctrines and think in much broader, more general
terms. The objective here is not that of building a machine to solve
problems in the fastest and most efficient manner, but rather to
give the machine a potential for solving problems no one thought it
would ever encounter. To that end, there must be some trade offs.
      The trade off in this case is something you might want to call
adaptive trauma. This matter of adaptive trauma is extremely
inefficient and, in fact, counterproductive; it tends to work against
the machine's success.
      Actually, there is a very simple and rational reason for intro¬
ducing the confidence-level scheme and allowing adaptive trauma
to mess up the creatures' scores. The reason is this: The feature is
absolutely necessary for Gamma-Class behavior. So why deal with
it in the context of a Beta-Class machine? There are two good
answers to the last question.
      First, it is tough enough to learn the fundamentals of
Gamma-Class behavior without trying to see how the confidence-
level feature works at the same time. It will be easier to appreciate
the workings of a GAMMA-I creature if you already understand

                                                                   243


===== PDF PAGE 246 =====

contidence levels in the context of the more familiar and simpler
BETA system.
     The second reason for dealing with confidence levels in a
BETA context is that you must have some new scoring curves for
reference purposes. The confidence-level feature is an indespens-
able part of GAMMA operation, and since the use of confidence
levels tends to lower scoring curves, a direct comparison between
GAMMA adaptive curves and those you have generated from
non-confident BETAs would not be a valid one.

A SIMPLE BETA-1 WITH CONFIDENCE
     The introduction of a confidence-level subroutine and its ulti¬
mate function in Gamma-Class operations makes it necessary to
begin tightening up the memory space devoted to master programs
and their associated subroutines. Thus, you will find the programs
and subroutines appearing in a much tighter and, alas, less flexible




Fig. 13-1. Master program flowchart for
BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE.




244


===== PDF PAGE 247 =====

form. There will be a lot more multiple-statement lines and, in
some instance, fewer separate subroutines.
      For example, look at the flowchart for the master program
used with this BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE creature. It appears
rather simple compared to the master programs you have been
using lately. Don’t be mislead by the simplicity of the drawing,
however. The fact of the matter is that much of the usual ALPHA
and BETA operations have been shifted over to a subroutine
represented by BETA CONL in Fig. 13-1.
      The flowchart in Fig. 13-1 shows the operation starting out
much as an ordinary BETA-I program does. The memory is dimen¬
sioned, a heading appears on the screen, the field is drawn, and the
creature is initialized. There’s nothing significantly new so far.
Then, the flowchart calls for a SET NEW MOVE, followed im¬
mediately by a typical CONTACT conditional. If there is no con¬
tact, CO=0 and operation shifts down to the MOVE step. And from
there, the creature sets its next move. If any suggested move
results in a contact situation, the CONTACT conditional is satis¬
fied, the NO. CONTACTS figure is incremented by C=C+1, the
creature figure is flashed by BLINK, and then the system calls
 BETA CONL—the confidence-level subroutine. The important
point in this part of the discussion is that the confidence-level
feature is put into effect only when the creature is dealing with a
contact situation.
      Now, look at the flowchart in Fig. 13-2. It is the flowchart for
 the BETA CONL operation, S.200 BETA CONL-1. Many of the
 operations on this flowchart should look familiar; they have been
part of BETA work you have been doing through the past few
chapters.
      In the first step, for instance, the current values of I and U (the
motion code) are saved. The second step calls for addressing the
Beta memory and then the system encounters the BEFORE condi¬
tional. It turns out that the BEFORE conditional is defined much
differently than before. Instead of looking for a stop code stored in
memory (I=0,J=0, this version looks at the confidence level, KL,
in the memory data. If KL is equal to zero, the implication is that
the creature hasn’t the foggiest idea how to solve the problem at
hand, and as a result, the system shifts over to an Alpha-like series
of operations: BLINK, FETCH NEW MOVE, etc.
     If BEFORE shows that the confidence level of the situation is
greater than zero, it follows that a workable response from the past
exists in the Beta memory. The system reads that motion code at

                                                                    245


===== PDF PAGE 248 =====

READ MOTION CODE, decodes it to a stnadard I/J format, and
tries it by means of a CONTACT conditional.
      Now, if the response is still a good one, the CONTACT
conditional is not satisfied and the system looks at another condi¬
tional, KL less than 4. In other words, “Is the confidence level less
than the maximum?’’ If so, the confidence level is incremented by
KL=KL+1. The previously established response to the contact
situation worked again (CONTACT was not satisfied), and it is
time to upgrade the creature’s confidence level a little bit. There
isn’t much point in working with confidence levels greater than 4,
however. So if it turns out that KL less than 4 is not satisfied, the
KL=4 simply holds the confidence level at 4.
      How does the system know what the KL value is? It read the
value from memory back at the BEFORE conditional. It had to read
the KL value at that time in order to determine whether or not the
creature had ever encountered and solved the situation before.

246


===== PDF PAGE 249 =====

      Assuming the remembered response worked, the memory is
revised at LOAD MEMORY to include the new KL value. Then the
NO. GOOD MOVES figure is incremented at D=D+1 and the
memory map is updated by SHOW MEMORY. The whole CONL
subroutine is terminated and operations return to the main pro¬
gram.
      The discussion thus far assumes (1) the creature has encoun¬
tered a given situation before and remembers the workable solu¬
tion and (2) the remembered solution works again. But what hap¬
pens if the BEFORE conditional finds KL=0?
      If KL=0, one of two things has happened. Either the situation
at hand is an entirely new one as far as the creature is concerned, or
a high-confidence response from the past has been tried and proven
no good at all. In the first case, KL has never been incremented
above zero, and in the second case, some higher value of KL has
been decremented to zero. In either case, the creature has to pick a
random response to get things going again.
      This scheme uses the familiar S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE
subroutine for picking out a random response. The difference in
this confidence-level scheme is that KL is set to one, the lowest
confidence level that means anything.
      After the confidence level is set to one, the new “idea” is
decoded and tested. If it doesn't work (as determined by the
CONTACT conditional, the NO. CONTACTS counter is in¬
cremented and KL is tested for a zero value. Of course, KL is not
equal to zero now because it was previously set to one by KL=1.
The response didn't work, however, so the weak confidence level
is decremented to zero by KL=KL-1. And, since KL=0 again in
this example, the system resorts to picking another random motion
code.
      Things continue running through this loop until the creature
comes up with a motion code that solves the situation. The CON¬
TACT conditional is not satisfied, KL is incremented to two by
KL=KL+1, and operations soon get back to normal.
      The only other confidence-level situation to consider is one
where KL is greater than one, but for some reason the stored
response doesn't work. Recall that one of the primary characteris¬
tics of BETA creatures is their ability to optimize the responses
stored in Beta memory. It is a sad fact of life that some responses
perfectly workable under one set of conditions simply do not work
under slightly different conditions. BETAs cover this sort of situa¬
tion by testing the validity of each remembered response, changing
them whenever the situation demands it.

                                                                 247


===== PDF PAGE 250 =====

      You have read about this in an earlier chapter, but perhaps a
specific example would be helpful. The drawing in Fig. 13-3 shows
the path taken by a BETA creature that has established a certain
kind of habit pattern of motion. The pattern is one where the critter
moves downward and a bit to the right. Upon making a contact with
the border figure, it has learned to respond by moving upward and a
bit less to the right. After that, it responds to a contact situation by
moving downward and toward the right again. This regular pattern
works out rather well until the creature hits the right-hand edge of
the border figure. The learned response, moving upward and a bit
toward the right, no longer works. The response that worked so
many times before does not work under all possible situations of
the kind, and the critter is forced to come up with a different kind of
response. The new response will then (most likely) work, whether
the contact is with the bottom of the border or with the right-hand
edge.
      This situation is dealt with on the flowchart in Fig. 13-2 at the
point where the first KL=0 conditional, the one immediately fol¬
lowing C=C+1, is not satisfied. A response that worked before
(BEFORE conditional satisfied) no longer works (CONTACT con¬
ditional satisfied.) As a result, the confidence level is decremented
by one (KL=KL-1), and if the confidence level is still greater than
zero, the stubborn critter tries the same response again. Note the
loop back to DECODE.
      This stubborn creature continues working the same old re¬
sponse until KL is decremented all the way down to zero. When




Fig. 13-3. An example showing how a previously learned response will
not work under certain circumstances.

248


===== PDF PAGE 251 =====

that finally happens, he wises up and fetches a random response by
going to the loop beginning at L. 235.
      Incidentally, this isn’t altogether a matter of being stupid or
mule-headed. If you were working with a genuine mechanical robot
in the real world (as opposed to a simulated robot under ideal
conditions), the fact that it tries the same response several times in
succession might well get it out of the contact situation. Think
about that for a moment.

Loading BETA-1 WITH CONFIDENCE
     The program can be loaded beginning with BETA-I BASIC
WITH SCORING AND SHOWING MEMORY (Chapt. 9.) The
following subroutines carry over to this new program without any
necessary alterations:

        S.450 BUNK or MOVE {BLINK-1)
        S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
        S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
        S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
        S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
        S.1000 SHOW MEMORY (SHOW MEM-1)

Here is the S.500 HEADING subroutine, somewhat tightened up
and shortened to eliminate the memory-gobbling FOR-NEXT loop:

500 REM ** BETA CONL HEAD-1 **
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25) “RODNEY BETA-1’’;PRINTTAB(25)“CONL VER¬
SION”
510 INPUT“DO ENTER TO START”:S$:RETURN

      When comparing S.200 BETA CONL-1 to the flowchart in
Fig. 13-2, you ought to note a couple of important features. Note,
for instance that the confidence level, variable KL, is carried as the
third data element in the 5x5x3 memory array. This shows up
most clearly in the second statement in line 205, where
KL=M(MI, MJ, 3). Line 245 in the S.200 subroutine then does the
LOAD MEMORY operation, loading the new confidence value by
the statement M(MI, MJ, 3)=KL.
      As in earlier BETA programs, encoded values of I and J
(expressed as numbers between 1 and 5) are saved in the first and
second elements of the M array. See the first two statements in line
245. Load this S.200 BETA CONL (BETA CONL-1) subroutine
from scratch:

200 REM ** BETA CONL-1 **
205 MI=l-l-3:MJ=J-h3:KL=M(MI,MJ,3):IFKL=0THEN235


                                                                 249


===== PDF PAGE 252 =====

210 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M{MI,MJ,2)
215 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
220 IFCO=0THEN24f^
225 C=C+1 :IFKL=0THEN235
230 KL=KL+1:IFKL=0THEN235ELSE215
235 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:KL=1 :G0T0215
240 IFKL<4THENKL=KL+1ELSEKL=4
245 M(MI,M3,1)=l+3:M(MI,MJ,2)=J+3:M{MI.MJ,3)=KL:D=D+1;GOSUB
     1000. RETURN

     Since the master program for BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE
is quite different from that of BETA-I BASIC, it should be loaded
only after deleting the older master program. So do a DELETE for
lines 10 through 90 before loading this program:
10 REM ♦* BETA CONL MASTER-1 **
 15 DIMM(5,5,3):GOSUB500
20 CLS:FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:FORO=1TO2:M(M,N,0)=3:NEXTO,M,N
25C=C+1:MI=H-3:MJ=J-f-3:RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2);IFNOT
    (RI=0ANDRJ=0)THEN35
30 GOSUB55:GOSUB600
35 X=X-hl:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
40 IFCO=0THEN50
45 C=C-I-1 :GOSUB450:GOSUB200:GOSUB800
50 GOSUB450:GOTO35

What You Can Expect From This Program
     As mentioned earlier in this chapter, the confidence-level
effect won’t be noticeable through the creature’s first few contacts
with the border figure. In fact, the only time you will notice a
confidence-level effect is when the creature has established a habit
pattern of motion that becomes upset by an unexpected contact
situation. Under this set of circumstances you will see the creature
working at the same, non-working response several times in suc¬
cession. Of course, the SCORE figure will drop by an unusual
amount.
     If you want to confirm that confidence levels are indeed being
manipulated, enter this short testing program:

100 CLS:F0RM=1T05;F0RN=1T05:PRINTM“,“N” ”M(M,N,3)
105 INPUTS$:CLS:NEXTN,M:END

     Run the program in the usual fashion, watching for the time the
creature latches onto a habit pattern of motion. Then do a keyboard
BREAK, followed by a GOSUB 100. This will call the little test
routine, and you will see some figures on the screen. They will look
something like this:
         2,3       3

250


===== PDF PAGE 253 =====

The first two figures represent the address of the Beta memory as
encoded versions of I and J respectively. In this particular example,
2,3 specifies motion-code address I=-1,J=0.
     The third figure is the confidence level associated with the
motion-code address. Apparently the creature encountered a con¬
tact and solved the problems successfully, three different times.
The solution, itself, isn’t shown, but that could be included in the
testing routine by adding a PRINT statement for M(M,N,l)and
M(M,N,2).
     You will be able to see the confidence level figure for all Beta
memory locations by striking the ENTER key each time you want
to see a new one.
     Any confidence levels of zero indicate one of two things:
Either the creature never encountered the situation or it failed to
find a workable solution as often as it did find a good one.
     If you have allowed the creature to execute its habit-pattern
cycle several times, this little testing routine will show a few
confidence levels of 4. Those places in Beta memory are the ones
directly involved in the habit pattern. The remaining confidence
levels, those between 1 and 3 inclusively, represent responses the
creature executed in the process of establishing the habit pattern.
     If you have any problems at all with the overall program,
compare your listing with the composite version at the end of this
chapter. And while you’re at it, be on the lookout for statements in
your program that aren’t included in the composite listing. Delete
any such program lines, thereby cleaning up the program memory
for bigger things to come.

BETA-1 CONFIDENCE WITH MANUAL DISTURB
     The previous program does indeed represent the workings of
a BETA-I creature with confidence-level features. It is difficult to
appreciate the effects of adaptive trauma, however, because there
are no provisions for actively upsetting the creature’s habit pat¬
tern. With a few minor changes in the program, you can enter the
picture and tease the little critter into breaking an old habit.
     Figure 13-4 shows the scoring curves for a single adaptive
sequence. The dashed curve shows how a BETA without the
confidence-level feature responded to a new situation, and the solid
curve shows how a BETA with confidence handled a situation that
contradicted its past experience.
     The BETA without the confidence feature recovered rather
quickly since it readily rejected a remembered response that

                                                                251


===== PDF PAGE 254 =====

Fig. 13-4. Adaptive behavior of a BETA creature without the confidence
feature and one possessing the confidence feature. Note the destruction
of confidence through an adaptive trauma.

worked any number of times. The BETA creature with confidence,
however, insisted upon trying the old habit response four times in
succession, each try dropping the score a bit more. Once this
BETA creature exhausted its confidence in the response (at about
contact 20), it picked up a new one that worked. As a result, its
scoring curve began showing signs of good learning taking place.
     The curves in Fig. 13-4 demonstrate the vast differences in
the adaptive behavior of BET As running with and without the
confidence-level feature. The data, however, represents a very
small statistical sampling, and a critic of the idea could legitimately
object to the nature of the curves on the basis that the sampling is so
small.
     Some first-hand experience with the program about to be
described will convince you that the curves are quite representa¬
tive of BETA behavior and adaptive trauma in particular. No one to
date has run a compilation of a hundred or more such curves, and
that’s what is needed. So here’s your chance to make a contribution
to robotics.
     The following program simply allows you to interrupt the
normal sequence of events on the screen and inject a motion code of
your choosing. For the sake of saving program memory space, you
will find there are no goof-proofing features that automatically
bypass invalid motion codes. The morale of the story is this: Make
sure your motion codes are valid. Use Table 11-1 as a good listing
of valid motion codes for this project.

252


===== PDF PAGE 255 =====

     Compare the flowchart in Fig. 13-5 with that in Fig. 13-1, and
you will see the minor differences. The flowchart for this revised
program includes a DISTURB conditional and an INPUT DIS¬
TURB operation. Whenever the creature is moving about freely on
the screen, striking theZ) key interrupts the normal flow of events
and calls the INPUT DISTURB subroutine, S.300. You will see
from its listing that S. 300 simply allows you to enter new values of I
and J (the motion code), set the creature figure near the center of
the screen, set the scoring to zero, and resume activity after
redrawing the field at DRAW FIELD.

Loading BETA-1 CONFIDENCE WITH MANUAL DISTURB
     Save the program described in the previous section on cas¬
sette tape, and then make the following revisions and additions to
transform it into the MANUAL DISTURB version. First rewrite
S.500 HEADING this way:

500 REM ** BETA CONL DIST HEAD-1 **
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“RODNEY BETA-I”:PRINTTAB(20)“CONL DIS¬
TURB VERSION”
510 INPUT‘‘DO ENTER TO START”;S$;RETURN

Next, revise the master program to conform to this listing:

 10 REM ♦♦ BETA CONL DIST MASTER-1 **
 15 DIMM(5,5,3):GOSUB500
20 CLS:FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:FORO=1TO2:M(M,N,0)=3:NEXT0,M,N
25 FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:M(M,N,3)=0:NEXTM,N:GOSUB600
30 GOSUB550
35 X=X-H:Y=Y-f-J:GOSUB725
40 IFCO=OTHEN50
45 C=C-I-1 :GOSUB450:GOSUB200;GOSUB800
50 GOSUB450;IFINKEY$<>“D”THEN35
55 GOSUB300:GOTO30

And finally, add this little S.300 subroutine:

300 REM ** BETA DIST-1 **
305 CLS:INPUT‘‘NEWI,J”;I,J:CLS:X=45:Y=25:C=O:D=0;RETURN

The remainder of the subroutines are already in your program
memory.

How to Use This Program
     Run the program and give the BETA creature a chance to pick
up its habit pattern of motion and then run that pattern for several
cycles. Then, it is time to strike the D key and respond to the

                                                                   253


===== PDF PAGE 256 =====

Fig. 13-5. Master program flowchart
for BETA-I CONFIDENCE WITH
MANUAL DISTURB.




request for new values of I and J. If you want to try the complete list
of valid motion codes, use the listing in Table 11-1 as a guide.
      Remember, this program cannot tolerate invalid motion
codes. Entering values of I and J that are outside the bounds of -2
to 2 inclusively can run the creature outside its boundary, and when
that happens the system goes into an error mode which can ulti¬
mately destroy the creatures hard-won memory contents. Just be
sure to doublecheck your disturb motion code before entering it.

254


===== PDF PAGE 257 =====

     Each time you enter a new motion code, you have a chance to
observe and record the creature’s response to it. Sometimes it
picks up the disturbance and accepts it without making any blun¬
ders at all. At other times, the new code upsets things a little bit,
but if the creature finds the experience is one that doesn’t have a
very high confidence level, it recovers rapidly. There will always
be a couple of disturbance motion codes that catch the creature in a
habit pattern and throws his preconceived notions to the winds. It
undergoes some violent trauma, as reflected by the scoring.
     After you’ve had a chance to inject all 24 possible disturbance
codes and write down the scoring history in each case, average the
data to come up with a compiled response. The results ought to be
something between the two kinds of curves shown in Fig. 13-4.

COMPILING ADAPTATION CURVES FOR BETA WITH CONFIDENCE
      Inserting program steps that allow you to inject disturbance
codes makes it possible to observe finely graded adaptive behavior
on a first-hand basis. The procedure demands constant attention,
and if you’ve done some of the work suggested in the previous
section, you know that one complete set of tests requires 40
minutes to an hour of your time.
      Such an experimental setup, one calling for your undivided
attention, is not really suitable for extensive compiling projects.
What is needed now is a set of long-term adaptation curves which
will serve as a standard for the GAMMA work. In fact, the
GAMMA projects don’t mean very much if you do not have a set of
BETA WITH CONFIDENCE curves at hand.
      The idea is to devise an automated scheme for gathering
adaptive data for BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE. The general idea
is to let a new creature go through its initial learning phase without
any sort of outside interference. Once the habit pattern is estab¬
lished and has run at least four times, the next step is to slap it with
the 24 disturbance phases listed in Table 11-1. Let the creature
have 25 contacts to adapt to the new situation, recording the
SCORE figure at the 5th and 25th contact in each case.
      The situation is almost identical to that described for the
BETA ADAPTATION COMPILE program in Chapter 11. The only
difficulty is that smaller computer systems are running out of
available memory space, and it is difficult to make this compiling
program fully automatic.
      So for the sake of experimenters using 4k systems, the com¬
piling program in this section is semi-automatic. You start off the

                                                                   255


===== PDF PAGE 258 =====

new creature and determine for yourself when it has established its
habit pattern of motion. The general earmarks of this situation have
been described several times in earlier BETA chapters.
     The program is then set up so that it halts at contacts 5 and 25,
giving you an opportunity to jot down the SCORE figure and, after




Fig. 13-6. Master program flowchart for BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE
COMPILE.


256


===== PDF PAGE 259 =====

the 25th contact, enter a new disturbance motion code from the
keyboard. The scheme does indeed call for your attention, but the
fact that it automatically stops at the places requiring your full
attention means it’s possible to walk away from the experiment for
a while without letting things get out of hand.

Flowcharts for BETA>I CONFIDENCE COMPILE
      The master program for BETA-I CONFIDENCE COMPILE
is shown in a flowchart form in Fig. 13-6. It is basically the same as
the flowchart for the BETA-I CONFIDENCE WITH MANUAL
DISTURB shown in Fig. 13-5, but there are a few differences that
call for explanation.
      The program starts out in the usual fashion, dimensioning the
memory, doing a short HEADING routine, and initializing the
memory and the creature. In fact, there are no significant differ¬
ences through the main flow of events until the conditional, IN¬
TERRUPT, occurs.
      INTERRUPT senses the time to stop all ongoing activity until
you have a chance to gather the necessary data and tell the system
what to do next. There are three interrupt conditions: C=5, C=25,
and FD=1. Variable C, as usual, is defined as the number of
contacts the creature has made during a given cycle. I’ve devised a
system that interrupts the normal activity at the 5th and 25th
contacts, so INTERRUPT must be sensitive to those two condi¬
tions.
      The FD variable is a new one, though. It is a flag variable
which causes an interrupt to occur an5d:ime you specify, whether C
happens to be equal to 5, 25, or anything else. The FD flag is
actually set whenever conditional WANT INTERRUPT is satis¬
fied. Note ±at satisfying WANT INTERRUPT brings up an FD=1
operation. As far as you, the operation, are concerned, WANT
INTERRUPT is satisfied (and the interrupt flag, FD, is set) any¬
time you strike the D key while the creature is running freely. So,
you can cause an interrupt by striking the D key, but normally you
will want to let the interrupts occur automatically at C=5 or C=25.
      At any rate, satisfying the INTERRUPT conditional brings up
a new subroutine, S.300 STOP. During the STOP operation, the
creature’s activity is frozen on the screen and you can easily read
the SCORE figure for the record.
      The exact mechanism of the STOP subroutine will be de¬
scribed in a moment. For the time being, it is sufficient to say it is
the operation that allows you to enter a disturbance code from the

                                                                 257


===== PDF PAGE 260 =====

keyboard. If you specify it is time to do a new disturbance code,
operations leave the STOP routine with C reset to zero. The C=0
conditional is then satisfied and the system responds by redrawing
the border figure and trying out the move you specified.
     If, in the process of executing the STOP subroutine, you
decide it is not time to inject a new motion code, variable C is not
reset to zero; it retains the value it had upon entering the STOP
subroutine. That being the case, C is not equal to zero, the C=0
conditional is not satisfied, and the program returns to the normal
BETA CONL loop.
     There is a second C=0 conditional on the flowchart, one
directly following the S.200 BETA CONL subroutine. The reason




Fig. 13-7. Flowchart for subroutine 200 as revised for BETA-I WITH
CONFIDENCE COMPILE.


258


===== PDF PAGE 261 =====

for the second C=0 conditional is that the new BETA CONL
subroutine will, itself, contain and INTERRUPT conditional and
STOP operation. So if the operations are stopped during BETA
CONL, the second C=0 conditional determines whether the figure
should be restarted (a new disturbance code has been introduced)
or resume its present activity (no new disturbance introduced
during the BETA CONL subroutine).
     The BETA CONL subroutine is flowcharted for you in Fig.
13-7. It is quite similar to the BETA CONL subroutine used in the
two previous programs in this chapter. The main differences are
the presence of two additional conditionals, C=5 OR C=25 and
C=0 and the subroutine STOP.
     These additional operations amount to another interrupt
routine, one that is almost identical to the interrupt routine in the
master program of Fig. 13-6. The reason BETA CONL has to
include this interrupt feature is that the contact-count variable
often increments to 5 or 25 during the execution of this subroutine.
If you were to omit the interrupt sequence here, the system might
count through 5 or 25 contacts without sensing them in the master
program.
     The flowchart for the STOP subroutine is illustrated in Fig.
13-8. Whenever this subroutine is called by one of the interrupt
conditions, either in the master program or in the BETA CONL
subroutine, it first increments D, the NO. GOOD MOVES variable.
      The fact that D is incremented upon doing the STOP sub¬
routine might sound like a bit of cheating in favor of the creature,
but the process is necessary for showing scores of 1.000 when,
indeed, they occur. Note that D is decremented by one at operation
D=D-1 later in the flowchart, which means things are evened out
in the long run anyway.
      So D is incremented first and then the display is updated to
reflect the current SCORE. The READY conditional is the one
responsible for stopping all activity until you have a chance to
record some data. When you’ve done that, simply striking the
ENTER key satisfies the READY conditional and operations re¬
sume with yet another conditional operation—C greater than or
equal to 25. If C is less than 25, variable D is restored to its original
value (no cheating, you see), the border figure is redrawn on the
screen to eliminate the question mark generated by the READY
conditional, and control returns to the calling program.
     Now, suppose C is equal to or greater than 25. In that case, the
scheme calls the conditional, WANT DISTURB. In other words.

                                                                    259


===== PDF PAGE 262 =====

                                      s ao*'




Fig. 13-8. Flowchart for subroutine
300 STOP.




“Do you want to enter a new motion code?” If not, the value of D is
adjusted to its original value by D=D-1 and things precede as
described before. But, if you do specify a disturb condition, the
system asks for the values of I and J you want to enter. This is
handled by INPUT I, J. Upon receiving those values from the
keyboard, the system resets the score to wipe out past scoring
history, sets the creature at a position near the middle of the
screen, and returns operations to the calling program, either the
main program or the S.200 BETA CONL subroutine.

Loading BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE COMPILE
     This program can be loaded rather easily if the program from
the previous section is residing in program memory. Simply make
the following revisions:

300 REM    STOP-1 **
305 D=D-I-1:GOSUB800:INPUTS$


260


===== PDF PAGE 263 =====

31OIFO>=25THEN320
315 D=D-1:CLS:GOSUB550:RETURN
320 CLS:INPUT“DISTURB (Y OR N)”:S$
325 IFS$=“N”THEN315
330 INPUT'NEW l,J”:l,J:C=0:D=0:X=45:Y=25:CLS:RETURN

200 REM ** BETA CONL-2 **
205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:KL=M(MI,MJ,3):IFKL=0THEN235
210 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M{MI,MJ,2)
215 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
220 IFCO=OTHEN240
225 C=C+1:IFC=50RC=25THEN250
227 IFKL=0THEN235
230 KL=KL-1:IFKL=0THEN235ELSE215
235 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:KL=1 :G0T0215
240 IFKL<4THEN243
242 KL=4:G0T0245
243 KL=KL+1
245 M(MI,MJ,1)=I+3:M(MI,2)=J+3:M(MI,MJ,3)=KL:D=D+1:GOSUB1000:
    RETURN
250 GOSUB300:IFC=0RETURN
255 G0T0227

500 REM ♦* BETA^CONL COMP HEAD-1 ♦*
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)“RODNEY BETA-l”:PRINTTAB(23)“CONL COMP
    VERSION”
510 INPUT“DO ENTER TO START”:INPUTS$:RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL COMP-4 **
6O5GOSUB650:X=RI-t-25:Y=25;GOSUB65O:l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:C=O:D=O:
    RETURN
10 REM ** BETA CONL COMP-1 **
15 DIMM(5,5,3):GOSUB500
20 CLS:F0RN=1T05:F0RM=1T05:F0RD=1T02:M(M.N,0)=3;NEXT0.M.N
25 FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:M(M,N,3)=0:NEXTM,N:GOSUB600
30 GOSUB550
35 X=X-1-I:Y=Y-hJ:GOSUB725
40 IFCO=0THEN65
45 C=C-h1 :IFC=5ORC=25ORFD=1THEN50ELSE55
50 FD=0:GOSUB300:IFC=0THEN30
55 GOSUB450:GOSUB200:IFC=0THEN30
60 GOSUB800
65 GOSUB450:IFINKEY$=“D”FD=1
70 G0T035

Running and Gathering Data From BETA CON COMP
     This is a tedious process, or so it seems to use who have been
nurtured and spoiled by modem data-processing technology. Bear
in mind that the process comes to a halt when it is time for your to
do something, so you need not waste all your time watching the
program mn. Why not study some more chapters in this book while
you keep an eye on the progress.
     First run the program to launch a new creature. The program
will stop at the 5th contact and show the scoring, but chances are

                                                                261


===== PDF PAGE 264 =====

quite remote that the critter has already established a habit pat¬
tern. So just strike the ENTER key and the program resumes. It
will stop again at the 25th contact. Even then, there might not be a
clear-cut habit pattern, so you will want things to continue as they
are. Striking the ENTER key this time results in the question
DISTURB (Y OR N)? You don’t want to disturb the activity until the
habit pattern has been established, so ENTER andA^ and you will
see the activity picking up from where it left off.
      Keep and eye on things until you see the creature has clearly
established a habit pattern of motion. You know all the signs by
now. Let it execute the pattern at least four times, then hit the D
key. That’s the only way you can get an interrupt to occur once the
SCORE figure passes 25.
      After striking the D key, the creature will continue crawling
across the screen until it hits the border. At that moment the
screen will clear and you’ll get the question, DISTURB (Y OR N)?
Now, you do indeed want to disturb the creature, so you should
respond by entering Y. Doing so, you’ll see the message NEW I,J?
Enter your values of I and J that way, and I value, a comma, and a J
value.
      What value should you enter? Look at the worksheet in Fig.
13-9. The first suggested values are -2,-2. Enter these values
and you’ll see the border figure drawn afresh and the creature
moving from the center of the border figure toward the upper
left-hand comer. You won’t see that the score has been reset until
the creature makes its first contact with the border figure.
      The creature adapts to its new motion code, the disturbance,
in its own fashion until contact 5 occurs. When this occurs the
program is halted and you should not the SCORE figure on the
worksheet. Strike the ENTER key to resume.
     Activity then precedes in the normal fashion until the creature
makes its 25th contact of the cycle. Then it is time to again note the
SCORE figure on the worksheet, respond to DISTUfe Q[ OR N)
by entering Y, and respond to NEW I,J by entering the next set of
motion-code values-2,-1 if this happens to be the second phase
of the project.
      Continue in this fashion until you have had a chance to enter all
24 possible combinations of disturbance motion codes and record
the SCORE figure at the 5th and 25th in each case.
     What next? Take a break, give your computer a keyboard
BREAK and start all over again by entering RUN. Run as many of
these cycles as you can remembering that it doesn’t have to be done

262


===== PDF PAGE 265 =====

                                                              I
                                                                        CO    '
                                                                    to LL
                                                          o TD 2
                                                           $
                                                          TJ O) O
                                                              0 c
                                                              (O
                                                              (D It UJ
                                                              O)
                                                              O)
                                                              3
                                                         CO

                                                         a>
                                                                                  o
                                                          I
                                                         CO                  00 LU
                                                           . ®
                                                                              -   O
                                                          O) ® E
                                                               o 111
                                                         ii. w                    Q
    25




  m
   25




  1/)
  25




IT)
CM




tr>



m
CM




m
CM




m
92




                                                         o                   CM   CM             CM   CM                  CM   CM        O          CM
                       -2




              CM            O         CM    CM                                                                  O
                   1                         1       7                             1    1              1    1                   1    1
DISTURB




              CM
                       -2




                            CM   CM                                               o    o    O    o                             CM   CM   CM   CM    CM
               1             1    1    1         1   1    1         1         1



                                                                                                      m         N.        o>
                                                                                                                               20




                                                                   a>
                                                                                                                                         22




          o   -        CM   CO        \ri   CD           CO                  o         CM   CO             CD        OO
PHASE




                                                                                  -                                                 S         S     Si




                                                                                                                                                   263


===== PDF PAGE 266 =====

in one day. The more critters you run, the more significant your
results will be. When you’ve run all the creatures you want to run,
average the results for each of the 24 phases at contacts 5 and 25.
The averaged data can then be transferred to a graph, and there she
is, a compiled adaptation curve for BETA-I creatures with
confidence-level scoring.
     Experimenters having access to computers with 16k or more
of memory are certainly invited to compose a fully automatic
version of this compiling experiment. At the time of this writing, no
one in the world has done it yet.

COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS

BETA-i WITH CONFIDENCE Listing

10 REM ** BETA CONL MASTER-1 »»

15 DIMM(5f5»3 ):GOSUB500

20 CLSIF0RN=lT05tF0RM=lT05:F0R0=lT02:M(M»Nf0)*3:NEXTO»M»N

25 FORN=1T05:FORM=1T05:M( M»Nf3 )-0:nexth»n

30 GOSUB550tGQSUB600

35 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

40 IFCO=OTHEN50

45 C=C+1:GOSUB450:GOSUB200;G0SUB800

50 GOSUB450:G0T035

200 REM      BETA CONL-1

205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3JKL=M( MI»MJ»3):IFKL=0THEN235

210 RI=M(MI»MJ»l):RJ=M(MIfMJ»2)

215 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

220 IFCO=0THEN240

225 C=C+1:IFKL=0THEN235

230 KL=KL-1:IFKL=0THEN235ELSE215

235 G0SUB450:G0SUB650:KL=1:G0T0215

240 IFKL<4THENKL=KL+1ELSEKL=4

245 M( MIfMJ,1 )=I+3;M( MIfMJr2 )=J+3:M( MI»MJ»3)*KL:D*D+1tGO
    subiooo:return
450 REM ** BLINK-1

455 SET( X>Y )ISET( X+1»Y ):RESET(XfY ):RESET<X+1fY )


264


===== PDF PAGE 267 =====

460 RETURN

500 REM ** BETA CONL HEAD-1 **

505 CLS:PRINTTAB( 25)"R0DNEY BETA-1"tPRINTTABC25 )"CONL
    VERSION"
510 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START”»INPUTS^JRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-2 **

552 Fl=15553tF2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=F1T0F2:P0KEF»131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEF»176:NEXT
565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 FORF=F2TOF4STEP64:POKEFr191;NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL-2

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i
615 c=o:d=o
620 RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1 tt

660 RI = RND(5 ):RJ = RND( 5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 *»

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):FORYP=1T01+ABS( J )

735 IFPOINTC X+SGN(I )*XP»Y+SGN(J )*YP )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTtNEXT

745 co=o:return

750 co=i:return

800 REM       UD SCORE-1 **

805

810 E=D/C
850 PRINTei5»"N0. CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35f"NO.      GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"

855 PRINTe87FC:PRINTei08fD

                                                          265


===== PDF PAGE 268 =====

860 PRINTeil9>USINGU$fE

865 RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1 »♦

1010 W=16327

1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO*1T02

1020 P0KEW»127+M(M»N»0)

1025 w=w+i:next:next:next

1030 RETURN

BETA-1 CONFIDENCE WITH MANUAL DISTURB Listing
10 REM       BETA CONL BIST MASTER-1

15 DIMM( 5r5T3);G0SUB500

20 cls:forn=ito5:form=ito5:foro=ito2:m(M»N»o)=3:nexto»m»n

25 FORN=1T051FORM=1T051M< M»N»3 )=0 S NEXTM»NIG0SUB600

30 G0SUB550

35 x=x+i:y=y+j:gosub725

40 IFCO=0THEN50

45 C=C+1:GOSUB450:GOSUB200:GOSUB800

50 GOSUB450;iFINKEY$<>-D"THEN35

55 GOSUB300:GOT030

200 REM ** BETA CONL-1 **

205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:KL=M< MIfMJ f3 ):IFKL=0THEN235

210 RI=M(MI fMJ,l )tRJ=M<MIfMJ»2)

215 I=RI-3;J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

220 IFCO=0THEN240

225 C=C+i:iFKL=0THEN235

230 KL=KL-i:iFKL=0THEN235ELSE215

235 GOSUB450:G0SUB650:KL*15G0T0215

240 IFKL<4THENKL=KL+1ELSEKL*4

245 M( MI f MJ f 1 )= I +3:M( MI»M J »2 )* J+3 J M< M11MJ13 )aKL I D»D41:
      GOSUBIOOO{RETURN

300 REM        BETA DIST-1 **

305 CLS:INPUT-NEW IrJ-»I»J:CLS;X*45:Y*25;C=0:D*0{RETURN


266


===== PDF PAGE 269 =====

450 REM *♦ BLINK-1 t*

455 SET( XfY ):SET< X+lfY ):RESET(XrY ):RESET< X + lfY )

460 RETURN

500 REM ** BETA CONL BIST HEAD-1 »*

505 CLS:PRINTTAB( 25)"R0DNEY BETA-I":PRINTTAB<20 )"CONL
    DISTURB VERSION-
510 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START";S$tRETURN
550 REM ** FIELD-2 »K

552 Fl=15553tF2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2;P0KEFf131INEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEF>176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEF>191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM       INITIAL-2 ♦#

610 x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i

615 c=o:d=o

620 RETURN

650 REM Hfi* FETCH NEU-1 *t

660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)

735 IFPOINT(X+SGN(I )»XPrY+SGN( J )»YP )=-lTHEN750

740 NEXTtNEXT

745 co=o:return

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE-1 **

805 □$="#*♦♦#"

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTI?15f "NO* CONTACTS"

852 PRINTe35T'*N0» GOOD MOVES"

                                                           267


===== PDF PAGE 270 =====

853 PRINT(?55r "SCORE"

855 PRINT(?87rC:PRINTei08»D

860 PRINT(?119»USINGU$»E

865 RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1

1010 U=16327

1015 F0RM=1T05:F0RN=1T05:F0R0=1T02

1020 P0KEW»127+M<M»N»0)

1025 u=ufi:next:nextjnext

1030 RETURN

BETA CON COMP Program Listing
10 REM      BETA CONL COMP-i

15 DIMM(5f5»3 ):G0SUB500

20 CLS:F0RN=1T05;F0RM=1T05:F0R0=1T02;M(       )=3:NEXT0fM»N

25 FORN=1T05;FORM=1T05:M( M»Nr3 )=0:NEXTM»N:G0SUB600

30 GOSUB550

35 X=X+I;Y=Y+J;G0SUB725

40 IFCO=OTHEN65

45 C=C+1:IFC=50RC=250RFD=1THEN50ELSE55

50 FD=0:GOSUB300:IFC=OTHEN30

55 GOSUB450 tGOSUB200IIFC=0THEN30

60 GOSUB800

65 GOSUB450;iFINKEY$="D"FD=l

70 G0T035

200 REM       BETA CONL-1 **

205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:KL=M( MI»MJf3):iFKL=0THEN235

210 RI=M(MI»MJfl ):RJ=M(MI»MJ»2)

215 I=RI-3:.J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

220 IFCO=0THEN240

225 C=C+i:iFKL=0THEN235

230 KL=KL-1:G0T0215

235 GOSUB450:GOSUB650;KL=1:GOT0215


268


===== PDF PAGE 271 =====

240 IFKL<4THENKL=KL+1ELSEKL=4
245 h(MifMJf 1 )=i+3:m<HirHJf2)=j+3;m(mi»mj»3)=kl   :d=d+i:
    gosubiooo:return
300 REM tt STOP-1 **
305 D=D+1:GOSUB800:INPUTS$
310 IFC>=25THEN320
315 d=d-i;cls:gosub55o:return
320 CLS:iNPUT*’DISTURB (Y OR N)";S$
325 IFS$ = "N'‘THEN315
330 iNPUT"NEW I»j"51fjtc=o:D=o;x=45:y=25:cls:return
450 REM ** BLINK-1 »»
455 SETC XfY );SET( X+1»Y ):RESET( XfY ):RESET( X+1»Y)
460 RETURN
500 REM ** BETA CONL COMP HEAD-1 **
505 CLS:PRINTTAB(25)”R0DNEY BETA-1-;PRINTTAB(23)"C0NL comp
    VERSION-
510 INPUT"DO ENTER TO START"JINPUTSitRETURN
550 REM ** FIELD-2 **
552 Fl=155531 F2=15615;F3=161931F4=16255
555 F0RF=F1T0F2:P0KEF»131:NEXT
560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176:NEXT
565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:POKEF r191JNEXT
570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:P0KEFf191:NEXT
575 RETURN
600 REM ** INITIAL COMP-4 **
605 GOSUB650:X=RI425;Y=RJ+25:GOSUB650:I*RI-3 ;j=RJ-3 :c»o; *
     d*o:return
650 REM ** FETCH NEU-1
660 RI=RND(5 ):RJ=RND(5)
665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660
670 RETURN
725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 ♦♦
730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP=1T01+ABS( J)
 735 IFPOINT< X+SGN(I )»XPfY+SGN< J )*YP )=-lTHEN750
740 next;NEXT
745 C0=0:RETURN
750 CO=i;RETURN
800 REM ** UD SCORE-1 **
805 U$="*****"
810 E=D/C
 850 PRINTei5f"NO» CONTACTS”
 852 PRINT(?35r"N0» GOOD MOVES”
 853 PRINT(?55r-SCORE*'
 855 PRINT@87rC:PRINT01O8rD
860 PRINTeil9fUSINGU$fE
865 RETURN
 1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1 **
 1010 W=16327
1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:FORO=1T02
1020 P0KEW»127+M(M»N»0)
1025 W=U-H:NEXT:NEXTtNEXT
1030 RETURN


                                                         269


===== PDF PAGE 272 =====

              Introducing
              The Gamma-Class Creature


An Alpha-Class machine is one that shows only reflexive responses
to changing environmental conditions. What’s more, it lives just in
the moment—it has no memory of past experience and it certainly
cannot contemplate the future.
       A Beta-Class machine can remember and use successful re¬
sponses of the past to help solve problems of the present. Like its
Alpha-Class ancestor, however, a Beta-Class creature has abso¬
 lutely no recognition of future events.
       A Gamma-Class machine represents the next logical step in
this evolution of intelligent robot machines. Like its Beta-Class
ancestor, a Gamma machine lives in the present and has recall of
past events. The real hallmark of a Gamma creature, however, is
 its ability to anticipate events that have not yet occurred. It has the
 ability to enhance the quality of its present condition by drawing
 upon remembered experiences and generalizing them to future
 conditions.
       The creation of a Gamma-Class creature follows a very logical
 pattern:
      Alpha C/ass—knowledge of present conditions only
      Beta C/ass—knowledge of past and present conditions
       Gamma C/^zss—knowledge of past, present, and future condi¬
                          tions.
 I believe that any other evolutionary scheme would be needlessly
 complicated.
       Now, recall that the BETA programs used ALPHA programs
 as starting points. Every BETA creature has a powerful ALPHA
 component in its modes of behavior. But, as a BETA creature
 learns its way around the world, the ALPHA component of its
 behavior becomes less obvious, giving way to remembered re¬
 sponses.
       A GAMMA program is then an extension of a basic BETA
 program. It has some strong ALPHA characteristics at first, but

270


===== PDF PAGE 273 =====

given some experience with the world, these purely reflexive
responses give way to BETA-like responses. However, given
some BETA-like experience, which also fades into the background
in favor of even higher-order GAMMA responses, problems never
encountered before are solved using theories generated by past
successes.
GENERALIZATION IS THE KEY TO GAMMA BEHAVIOR
     A Gamma-Class machine is able to anticipate future problems
by generalizing some of the relevant qualities of first-hand experi¬
ences. As an example, suppose you were taught on the blackboard
in your grade school that 2 plus 2 equals 4. Each time the teacher
wrote 2+2=? on that same blackboard you then knew the correct
response is the numeral 4. You soon learned to solve the problem
perfectly, using direct experiences of the past to solve a problem of
the present.
     But, what if the teacher then tests your learning by showing
you the same problem written on a sheet of paper. Could you handle
that? The problem is the same (2+2=?X but the situation for
solving it is somewhat different—it’s on a sheet of paper rather
than the blackboard.
     You certainly should be able to work the problem just as well.
You have the ability to generalize first hand experiences capturing
the essential elements of the problem so you can deal with it under
a wide variety of different, but non-relevant, conditions in the
future. The essential elements of this situation are that 2+2=4,
and the solution is the same whether the problem is presented on
the blackboard, a sheet of paper, or, for that matter, any other
appropriate medium.
     This sort of generalizing process sounds easy in the context of
intelligent human beings. It isn’t all that easy for a machine,
however. Machines tend to be very literal in their interpretation of
surrounding conditions. In order to recognize a problem once
solved in the past, it must perceive every element of the environ¬
ment as being exactly the same as before. Beta-Class machines
work that way.
     A Gamma-Class machine searches its memory for the relev¬
ant conditions of problems and then attempts to fit the relevant
ideas into a framework of non-relevant surroundings that might
occur in the future. It is thus prepared to deal with the situation
under a variety of different conditions.
     All of the ALPHA-I and BETA-I creatures described in this
book are capable of recognizing and responding to 24 different

                                                                 271


===== PDF PAGE 274 =====

environmental conditions. It might be argued that there are actu¬
ally an infinite number of environmental conditions that can be
solved using any of 24 possible responses. But no matter how you
look at it, there are 24 kinds of relevant condition-response situa¬
tions.
     Now, suppose you have a BETA creature that has established
a habit pattern of motion, and it is dealing with maybe 5 different
condition-response situations quite effectively. In fact, the crea¬
ture’s responses are so effective that the confidence levels for
those responses grows to a maximum of 4. The remaining re¬
sponses have much lower confidence levels, however. Most of the
remaining responses have confidence levels of zero.
      What happens when you disturb the habit pattern? Well, if the
disturbance calls for encountering a brand new environmental situ¬
ation, the BETA creature sees a confidence level of zero and
switches over to ALPHA-like behavior to come up with a workable
response on the spot.
      But now suppose this same BETA creature, the one that has
established a habit pattern of motion made up of 5 different
condition-response situations, has a built-in GAMMA mechanism.
In this case, the system is sensitive to confidence levels of 4. The
moment it finds a confidence level of 4, the GAMMA creature
breaks down the situation into its most relevant components,
searching its own memory for those same elements as they exist in
bits and pieces at very low confidence levels (0 or 1, to be exact.)
Upon discovering the relevant elements of a successful response
residing in memory and carrying very low confidence levels,
GAMMA inserts the successful elements into those places. What
works quite well under one set of conditions ought to work just as
well under similar conditions not yet encountered on a first-hand
basis.
     In a manner of speaking, GAMMA generates theories about
what should work under untested conditions. The theories are well
founded, being based upon elements of responses that have been
quite successful in the past. A GAMMA creature performs this sort
of routine on every response in memory that carries a confidence
level of 4. Once the job is done, there are few condition-response
places in memory left untouched.
     Disturbing a GAMMA creature in such a way that it faces a
situation for the first time does not automatically throw back into
ALPHA-t5q)e behavior. A theory, or at least bits and pieces of a
theory, exist in most places in a trained GAMMA memory. It has
had a chance to presuppose what it should do when you disturb it.

272


===== PDF PAGE 275 =====

So when you disturb its habit pattern of motion, it calls upon the
theory and executes it.
      If the theory works—if the creature’s conjecture has been
correct—GAMMA immediately solves the problem and increases
its confidence level for that condition-response combination. What
was first established by conjecture is now confirmed by first-hand
experience. The creature had no need to resort to ALPHA-
creature behavior.
      Of course, there will be times when the creature’s conjectures
are not correct for one reason or another. A theory based upon
first-hand, successful experiences of the past simple doesn’t do the
job. In that case, GAMMA is forced to resort to ALPHA behavior,
picking up a random response that solves the problem. The new,
randomly generated response soon becomes part of GAMMA’s
storehouse of relevant knowledge, and it is then used for modifying
other conjectured responses.
      A GAMMA creature is fully capable of changing its mind—the
quality of its conjectured responses—as it gathers further first¬
hand experience. So GAMMA not only works to perfect its re¬
sponses, but its conjectured responses as well. A BETA creature
only works to perfect its overt, first-hand experiences, having no
regard for possibilities of the future.
      The bottom line is that a GAMMA creature is surperbly
equipped to deal with new circumstances. It adapts quite readily to
disturbances in its environment—it is prepared to do so. As a
result, the adaptation curves for a GAMMA creature are smoother
and rise more steadily than they do for a BETA creature.
FLOWCHARTS FOR GAMMA-I BASIC
  Figure 14-1 is the flowchart for a GAMMA-I master program. It
looks very much like a BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE flowchart,
and indeed the operations are much the same. Note the GAMMA
CONL subroutine operation. This is a confidence-level subroutine
which is almost identical to the one used in the previous chapter.
     GAMMA CONL does one thing a BETA CONL subroutine
does not, it sets a GAMMA FLAG variable (GF) whenever a
confidence level somewhere in memory first reaches the maximum
level of 4, and also whenever a confidence level in memory first
drops from 4 to 3 because a previously good response no longer
works. Look ahead tothe GAMMA CONL flowchart in Fig. 14-2 if
you want to see how that feature works. At any rate, GAMMA
CONL in Fig. 14-1 sets confidence levels and a GAMMA FLAG
whenever appropriate.

                                                               273


===== PDF PAGE 276 =====

Fig. 14-1. Flowchart for GAMMA-I BASIC master program.

     After doing the GAMMA CONL subroutine, the system up-
dates the display on the screen by means of the usual S.800
UPDATE DISPLAY subroutine. TTien the system checks the
GAMMA FLAG.

274


===== PDF PAGE 277 =====

     If the GAMMA FLAG is not set (GF=0), the whole program
works as a BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE (See Fig. 13-1). When
the GAMMA FLAG is set, conditional GF=1 is satisfied and the
program calls the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine. This is the
generalization subroutine that breaks down level-4 responses into
their essential elements and assigns them to untested parts of the
creature’s memory.
     If you did your homework and experiments with BETA-I
WITH CONFIDENCE, this flowchart ought to seem rather simple.


                                            S.2f»«
                                                       RUN COIL    ^



                                                       SAVE 1 J



                                                       ADDRESS
                                                       MEMORY



                                                                                     L245
                                                                                    ->T<-
                                                                        KL - H

                                                             KL    f!            3 45(1
                                                      READ MOTION                         BUNK
                                                         CODE

                                                                                 S65(1
                                                     L215                            FETCH NEW
                                                                                       MOVE
                                                        DECODE

                                                                                          KL   1


                                                     <C CONTACT
                                           CO H

                           L 25H




                           'Y

     KL   4            KL KL    1




                         SET
                      GAMMA flag

                               I 265


                   lOAD MEMORv



                                                       SET GAMMA
                       D D‘l
                                                          flag
              S iHHH

                  SHOW MEMORY



                 ("    return          ^




Fig. 14-2. Flowchart for S.200 GAMMA CONL. subroutine.

                                                                                                   275


===== PDF PAGE 278 =====

having only two really new operations—the GF=1 conditional and
the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine. You might also note that
S. 500 HEADING has been omitted from the flowchait in Fig. 14-1.
For smaller home computing systems, memory is getting scarce
and some unnecessary flourishes must be eliminated.
     The flowchart for GAMMA CONL is shown in Fig. 14-2.
Compare it with the BETA version in Fig. 13-2, and you won’t find
very many differences. In fact, there are only four additional opera¬
tions here: two SET GAMMA FLAG operations, a KL=4 condi¬
tional, and a KL=3 conditional.
      There should be no need to explain the entire flowchart since
that was done in Chapter 13. Of course, the additional operations
call for some special consideration. Suppose the creature has found
its way into the GAMMA CONL subroutine. According to the
master program flowchart in Fig. 14-1, this happens every time the
creature makes contact with the border figure. Further suppose the
creature has indeed encountered this particular situation before
(BEFORE conditional is satisfied), and the remembered response
works (CONTACT conditional is not satisfied). This set or situa¬
tions lead down to the KL less than 4 conditional in Fig. 14-2.
      Is the confidence level of the remembered response less than
4? If so, KL=KL-I-1 increments the confidence level. It should do
this because, you recall, the remembered response is working
again this time.
      Now, here is one of the new operations—the KL=4 condi¬
tional. The confidence level has just been incremented, and the
question is whether or not the confidence level has been in¬
cremented to the highest possible level. If so, SET GAMMA
FLAG sets variable GF equal to 1, and the system returns to the
main program after doing several operations common to BETA
CONL. If it turns out that the KL=4 conditional is not satisfied, the
SET GAMMA FLAG operation is bypassed. Presumably the
KL=KL-1-1 operation didn’t carry the confidence level to the high¬
est point yet.
      The GAMMA FLAG is thus set to 1 whenever a particular
remembered response reaches the 4 level. What’s more this flag is
set when the confidence level first reaches that level. If, after
sensing no contact at the CONTACT conditional, the system finds
that the confidence level is not less than 4, the entire GAMMA
FLAG sequence is bypassed through the KL=4 operation.
      Thus, the GAMMA FLAG is set to 1 when a certain remem¬
bered response shows a confidence level changing from 3 to 4. The

276


===== PDF PAGE 279 =====

flag routine is bypassed if that response is less than 4 or already-
equal to 4 when the whole business starts.
      There is a second GAMMA FLAG sequence in Fig. 14-2,
however. This one is responsible for controlling the program when
a confidence level decrements from 4 to 3. To see how this works,
suppose the creature enters the GAMMA CONL subroutine with a
situation calling for a response that has been successfully used
before (BEFORE conditional is satisfied.) For some reason, how¬
ever, that remembered response doesn't work, and the CONTACT
conditional is satisfied. As a result, C=CH-1 increments the NO.
CONTACTS figure, and then the system wants to know whether or
not the confidence level (KL) is already at zero. If not zero the
confidence level is decremented at KL=KL-1 and checked again by
the second KL=0 conditional. Assuming for the sake of this discus¬
sion that KL is not yet equal to zero, the system executes the
KL=3 condition.
       If KL is indeed equal to 3, the implication is that a previously
 high-confidence response is no longer working. It should not be
 used as part of the GAMMA generalization process, so the
 GAMMA FLAG is set to 1 by another SET GAMMA FLAG opera¬
 tion. Thus, the GAMMA FLAG is set whenever a confidence level
 drops from 4 to 3. Work your way around through this particular
 loop, and you will find that any other sort of drop in confidence level
 does not affect the GAMMA FLAG.
      Aside from keeping track of confidence levels, GAMMA
 CONL is also responsible for setting the GAMMA FLAG to 1 under
 two conditions: whenever a confidence level first makes a transi¬
 tion from 3 to 4, and whenever a confidence level first makes a
 transition from 4 to 3. Under any other conditions, the subroutine
 works just like a BETA CONL version.
       Now, return to the flowchart in Fig. 14-1 and you will be able
 to appreciate the significance of the GAMMA FLAG feature. In the
 flowchart, the GAMMA CONL subroutine is called whenever the
 creature makes contact with the border figure. After that, the
 GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine, S. 100, is called only if GAMMA
 CONL has set the GAMMA FLAG to a value of 1. Otherwise, the
 GAMMA FUNCTION of the system is ignored altogether.
       In other words, the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine is called
 only two conditions: whenever a confidence level first makes a
 transition from 4 to 3 or from 3 to 4. The overall significance is t!iat
 a GAMMA creature forms new theories about dea^ling with future
 events (executes the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine) only when

                                                                    277


===== PDF PAGE 280 =====

there is a marked change in some high confidence levels, either on
the positive side (3-to-4 transitions) or on the negative side (4-to-3
transitions.)
      The GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine is flowcharted in Fig.
14-3. While studying this flowchart, bear in mind that the sub¬
routine is called only when there is some change at the top-levels of
confidence. The direction of change, from 3 to 4 or from 4 to 3 is not
relevant. Either case calls for a “change of mind.”
      The first operation in Fig. 14-3 is to print a pound sign (#) at
the left-hand end of the memory-map display. In addition, this
GAMMA-I program displays the creature’s memory as most of the
BETA programs did. Now, you will find a pound sign printed
beside the memory map as long as the GAMMA FUNCTION
operation is at work. There is a very good reason for showing
the pound sign during the rather long GAMMA FUNCTION
interval. Whenever GAMMA is “thinking” through its memory
and devising theories, all creature activity on the screen comes
to a halt. Without signalling the GAMMA FUNCTION in some
fashion, you would have good cause to wonder whether or not
 something went wrong with the program.
      After signalling the start of the GAMMA FUNCTION by
printing the pound sign, the system clears something called a
CONL COUNTER. As you will see in a moment, the CONL
COUNTER keeps track of the number of level-4 confidence in the
memory.
      The system then clears something called the PHASE AC¬
CUMULATOR. Again, this will be described in greater detail a bit
later in this section. It is sufficient to say right now that this
operation clears a short-term memory which is responsible for
accumulating the bits and pieces of knowledge that might have
some relevailce to future environmental conditions.
      The next operation, INITIALIZE ADDRESS, is the first one
of vital operational importance. The creature, you see, is going to
search its entire memory for situations that have been solved
before and carry confidence levels of 4. The search is going to be a
very systematic one in this case, looking at every piece of memory
data from the first to the last. This searching operation has to be
initialized at the start, the justification for an INITIALIZING AD¬
DRESS operation.
      The next step is a small subroutine calles S. 184 SET PHASE.
This step classifies the address at hand according to some of its
most relevant elements. In this particular generalization scheme
there are eight different relevant contact situations:

278


===== PDF PAGE 281 =====

       1— current I and J motion parameters are both negative
       2— current I parameter is negative, but J is zero
       3— current I parameter is negative, but J is positive
       4— current I parameter is zero, but J is negative
       5— current I parameter is zero, but J is positive




   S 184*




Fig. 14-3. Flowchart for S.100 GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine.

                                                            279


===== PDF PAGE 282 =====

      6— current I parameter is positive, but J is negative
      7— current I parameter is positive, but J is zero
      8— current I and J motion parameters are both positive.
That is how every conceivable contact situation is classified. The
SET PHASE subroutine looks at the current address and classifies
it according to one of those 8 different definitions.
     So once the phase of the address is classified, the next ques¬
tion is whether or not the address contains a response having a
confidence level of 4. If the confidence level is indeed 4, the KL less
than 4 conditional is not satisfied, and the CONL COUNTER is
incremented. The system scans the entire memory, classifying the
situations and counting the number of high-level confidence re¬
sponses.
     After incrementing the CONL COUNTER, the system saves
the high-confidence response at ACCUMULATE PHASE DATA.
Besides scanning the entire memory, classifying the situations,
and counting the number of high-level confidence responses, the
system also keeps track of what those high-confidence responses
are.
     The ADDRESS DONE conditional merely checks to see if all
the addresses in memory have been searched. If not, the address is
incremented at INCREMENT ADDRESS , and the classifying
loop is executed again.
     Note, however, that conditions carrying confidence levels
less than 4 (satisfying conditional KL less than 4) are neither
counted nor accumulated. Lower-confidence responses are totally
ignored.The creature does not build theories on the basis of low-
confidence, untested experiences.
     When the job of searching the memory for high-confidence
experiences is done, all the accumulated information must be
compiled into a set of suggested responses for situations not yet
encountered on a first-hand basis. To this end, the system searches
contents of the PHASE ACCUMULATOR, averaging the I and J
responses under each of the 8 major classifications of situations and
coming up with “typical” motion codes to be tried whenever the
situation arises.
     In the early going, at least, there are going to be some gaps in
the creature's experiences, and any theories based upon non¬
existent information cannot possibly be useful or relevant in the
future. Hence, the need for a VALID PHASE DATA conditional.
This conditional is actually sensitive to classifications of contact
situations that have not been experienced at all. As you might

280


===== PDF PAGE 283 =====

 imagine, the number of such classifications tends to decrease with
 experience.
      Upon finding some of this sort of invalid phase data, the
system bypasses the two compiling steps, AVERAGE PHASE
DATA and ASSIGN MOTION CODE and runs down to the point
where the system looks for the end of the compiling operation. (See
the PHASE COMPILE DONE conditional.) If it happens that the
compiling operation has not been carried out for all eight possible
classifications of contacts, the system increments the PHASE
COUNTER at INCREMENT PHASE. (The PHASE COUNTER is
actually the CONL COUNTER doing double duty.)
      Reviewing what has taken place thus far, you can see that the
GAMMA creature scanned its memory very systematically, clas¬
sifying contact conditions, counting high-level responses, remem¬
bering those responses, and using them as a basis for compiling
suggested motion codes where low confidence levels exist.
     The final set of operations in Fig. 14-3 are responsible for
loading those suggested motion codes into memory. To this end,
the address is initialized and the contact conditions are again
classified by subroutine S. 184. This time, however, the system is
looking for very low confidence levels, as opposed to high-
confidence levels as in the first part of the routine.
     Upon finding a confidence level of 1 or 0 (by the conditional KL
greater than 1 not being satisfied), the system loads the appro¬
priate components of the compiled motion code into the creature’s
memory. This operation is carried out by LOAD NEW DATA
INTO MEMORY. However, the flowchart shows a conditional
operation preceding this point—PHASE DATA VALID.
     The I and J components of suggested motion codes are often
entered separately—maybe an I component from one phase is
combined with a J component from a different phase. There exists a
distinct possibility that the two components make up a stop code
(1=0 and J=0 at the same time). Since this particular motion code
has been considered invalid for Level-I creatures elsewhere in this
book, we simply follow the convention here.
     So portions of the creature’s memory that carry confidence
levels of 0 or 1 are loaded with suggested components of motion
codes compiled in an earlier part of the subroutine. Responses
carrying confidence levels of 2 or greater are not affected at all by
the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine.
      Once the system has run through the entire addressing sequ¬
ence, loading compiled or generalized motion codes into the ap-

                                                                281


===== PDF PAGE 284 =====

propriate places, it winds up operations by showing the new mem¬
ory map, erasing the pound sign, resetting the GAMMA FLAG to
zero and returning to the main program. All of this takes about 30
seconds.

LOADING GAMMA-1 BASIC
     It is probably pointless to dealve into the GAMMA process
any further until you have had a chance to witness it in action for
yourself. The program is best loaded with BETA-I WITH CONFI¬
DENCE already residing in program memory. This being the case,
you will find that the following subroutines can be used without any
alterations:

S.450 BUNK or MOVE (BLINK-1)
S.550 DRAW FIELD (FIELD-2)
S.600 INITIALIZE CREATURE (INITIAL-2)
S.650 FETCH NEW MOVE (FETCH NEW-1)
S.725 CONTACT (CON SENSE-1)
S.100 SHOW MEMORY (SHOW MEM-1)

     The GAMMA CONL subroutine, S.200 GAMMA CONL-1, is
quite different from the listing for its BETA counterpart. So delete
lines 200 through 245 and enter this GAMMA version:

200 REM ** GAMMA CONL-1 **
205 MI=l-t-3:MJ=J+3:KL=M(MI, MJ,3):IFKL= 0THEN245
210 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
215 l=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725
220 IFCO=0THEN250
225 C=C-h1:IFKL:=0THEN240
230 KL=KL-1:IFKL=0THEN245
235 IFKL=3THEN215
240 GF=1:G0T0215
245 GOSUB450:GOSUB650:KL=1;GOTO215
250 IFKL<4THEN255ELSE270
255 KI=KL-I-1 :IFKL=4THEN260 ELSE265
260 GF=1
265 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ:M(MI,MJ,3)=KL:D=D-h1:
    GOSUB 1000;RETURN
270 KL=4:G0T0265



For the sake of saving memory space for more valuable operations,
S.500 HEADING (BETA CONL HEAD-1) should be deleted from
your program memory. Do that by deleting lines 500 through
510.
     Next, load GAMMA FUNCTION, S.100 GAMMA GEN-1,
from scratch:

282


===== PDF PAGE 285 =====

100 REM ** GAMMA GEN-1 **
105 POKE16325, 35;FORK=1TO8:K{K)=0:FORL=1TO2;G{K,L)=0;NEXTL,
      K;F0RMI=1T05:F0RMJ=1T05:G0SUB184:IFM(MI,MJ,3)<4THEN115
110 K(GP)=K(GP)=K (GP)-t-1:G(GP,1) =G(GP, 1)-hM(MI, MJ, 1):G
      (GP,2)=G{GP,2)-hM(MI, MJ, 2)
115 NEXT MJ, Ml
120 F0RGP=1T08:F0RGQ=1T02
125 IFG(GP,GQ)=0ORK(GP)=OTHEN145
130 G(GP,GQ)=G(GP,GQ)/K(GP)
135 IFG{GP,GQ)<3THENG(GP,GQ)=2
140 IFG(GP,GQ)>3THEN(GP,GQ)=4
145 NEXTGQ,GP
150 GOTO160
155 G(GP,GQ)=0:GOTO145
160 F0RMI=1T05:F0RMJ=1T05:G0SUB184
165 IFM(MI,MJ,3)>10RG(GP,1)=ORG(GP,2)=0THEN175
170 M(MI,MJ,1)=G(GP,1):M(MI,MJ,2)=G(GP,2):M(MI,MJ,3)=1
175 NEXTMJ,MI
180 GOSUB1000:POKE16325,32:GF=0:RETURN
182 REM      GAMMA PHASE-1 *♦
 184 IFMI < 3ANDMJ < 3GP = 1
186 IFMI < 3ANDMJ =3GP=2
188 IFMI < 3ANDMJ > 3GP=3
190 IFMI = 3ANDMJ < 3GP=4
192 IFMI = 3ANDMJ > 3GP=5
194 IFMI > 3 ANDMJ < 3GP=6
196 IFMI > 3ANDMJ=3GP=7
198 IFMI > 3ANDMJ > 3GP=8
199 RETURN
     Finally, replace the old master program with this one:
10 REM ** GAMMA-I MASTER-1 **
15 CLS:DIMM(5,5,3):DIMG(8,2):DIMK{8)
20 FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:FORO=1TO3:M(M,N,O)=0:NEXTO,M,N:GO
   SUB550=GOSUB600
25 X=X-hl:Y=Y-l-J:GOSUB 725
30 IFCO=0THEN4O
35 C=C-f1:GOSUB450:GOSUB 200GOSUB800:IFGF=1THEN45
40 GOSUB450:GOTO25
45 GOSUB100:GOTO25
WHAT TO EXPECT FROM GAMMA-1 BASIC
     When you first run this program, the border figure will appear
on the screen almost immediately. There will be no HEADING
message at all. There will be a brief delay, however, as the master
program sets the dimensions of three memory arrays, the crea¬
ture’s main memory (array M(5,5,3)), the phase accumulator (array
G(8,2)) and the GONE counter (array K(8).
     Once things get underway, the creature begins behaving in a
typical BETA fashion. The moment it makes contact with the
border figure, the scoring format appears on the screen, and the
moment the creature picks a workable motion code, the memory

                                                               283


===== PDF PAGE 286 =====

map is drawn along the bottom of the screen. The creature bounces
around in the normal way, eventually working its way into a habit
pattern of motion—the whole thing appears to be working like a
basic BETA-I operation.
      However, after the GAMMA creature runs through its habit
pattern several times you will note the first signs of truly Gamma-
 Class behavior. One of the responses in the habit pattern has
picked up a confidence level of 4. Everything on the screen comes
to a halt and a pound-sign character appears at the left-hand end of
the memory map.
      Watch that pound sign and memory map very carefully. About
 15 seconds into the operation you will see portions of the memory
map change. This will happen just before the GAMMA FUNCTION
concludes and the creature goes about its business on the screen.
The changes happen rather quickly and suddenly, and you don't
want to miss out on seeing a computer reprogramming itself for the
first time.
      In most instances, the creature will resume its habit pattern,
pausing for a GAMMA FUNCTION each time it meets one of the
contact points. Once it has made it all the way through the habit
pattern (all the involved responses have been set to a confidence
level of 4 and the corresponding GAMMA FUNCTION has taken
place), the thing continues running the pattern without any
further GAMMA GEN operations. You will note, however, that
few elements of the memory map are left untouched by the
generalization processes.
      The only way to see any further GAMMA activity is if the habit
pattern is somehow disturbed. This particular program has no
provisions for letting you step into the picture and upset the
pattern, so you have to count on one of ±ose situations where a
certain response works for a number of times in succession, but
suddenly fails to work one time.
      The surest way to see some more GAMMA activity is to
BREAK the program and start all over again. As you might suspect,
the next chapter deals with ways to disturb the habit patterns and
see the most significant effects of GAMMA activity—the ability to
adapt to foreseen conditions not yet experienced on a first-hand
basis.

SOME FURTHER NOTES ABOUT THE GAMMA FUNCTION SUBROUTINE
     The GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine described in this chap¬
ter is just one of many possible approaches to generalizing the

284


===== PDF PAGE 287 =====

creature’s experiences. Now that you have had a chance to study
the flowchart and program listing, it is time to take a closer look at
it. The GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine first breaks down the
addresses of the memory into eight different categories. It sys¬
tematically scans all the address locations, assigning a numerical
value of 1 through 8 to variable GP.
      The chart shown earlier in ±is chapter describes the nature of
this address classification. GP is set to 1, for example, whenever
the I and J values of the current motion code are both negative. But
then, the same scheme gets GP equal to 2 whenever the I compo¬
nent of the current motion code is negative and the J component is
equal to zero, and so on.
      You should recall ±at memory is addressed by the motion
code the creature is executing the moment a contact with the
border figure occurs. Each address location then contains three
items of data: the I and J components of a solution as well as the
confidence level (KL) of that solution. Of course, that assumes a
workable solution has been found before. If that isn’t the cas^, all
three items of memory data are zero.
      Perhaps you should also be reminded that the I and J compo¬
nents of both the address and data are carried in an encoded form.
Rather than being values between -2 and 2 inclusively (actual
decoded I and J values), they are carried as integer values between
1 and 5.
      At any rate, the first part of the GAMMA FUNCTION sub¬
routine scans the entire family of memory address locations, as¬
signing phase-related values of GP to the addresses and searching
each address location for confidence levels of 4. Address locations
containing confidence levels less than 4 are ignored. At this point
the system is searching only for contact situations (addresses)
that have been repeatedly solved (encoded I and J data) four
times in succession (confidence level equals 4.)
      Upon finding an address carrying confidence data equal to 4,
the system does two things. First, it increments a confidence
counter, a variable assigned to each of the eight different address
phases. This variable is defind as K(GP). The second operation is
to enter the encoded I and J response data into an accumulator.
There are eight different accumulators, one for each of the eight
different address phases and are defined as G(GP,GQ).
      The phase accumulator is dimensioned at G(8,2) back in line
15 of the master program. The 8-item GP component carries the
address phase classification number, while the 2-item GQ compo¬
nent picks up the values of I and J responses.

                                                                 285


===== PDF PAGE 288 =====

      So whenever the system is scanning the memory addresses,
searching for confidence levels of 4, it responds to finding that
confidence level by incrementing a phase counter and saving the
encoded value of the motion-code response in a phase accumulator.
If a given address phase contains more than one 4-level confidence
response, the corresponding sets of response data are summed
together in the phase accumulator.
      When this first address-scanning operation is completed,
there are eight phase counters and eight phase accumulators con¬
taining response information of some sort. Those containing all
zeroes are then ignored outright; there is no point in trying to
generalize information that doesn’t exist. However, the phase
accumulators that do contain some response information are carry¬
ing sums of successful I and J responses. Furthermore, these sums
of successful responses are organized according to the 8 possible
address phases.
      The phase accumulators containing valid information are then
mathematically divided by their corresponding phase-counter val¬
ues, thereby generating an average response code in each case. So
what you have at this point is an average, or tvpical, motion code (a
very high-confidence code) as possible solutions to various possi¬
ble contact situations.
      Now, the addresses, or possible contact situations, are clas¬
sified by phases in the early going. By averaging the accumulated
responses, they also take on a phase-related character. Suppose,
for instance, that the accumulated I-value in a certain address phase
accumulator has an average value of -1.5 (encoded value of +1.5)
This is a clear indication that the successful responses built up for
that particular address phase tend to have negative values of I, or
encoded values less than 3. The situations represented by that
particular address phase are thus generally solved by moving the
creature from left to right. Of course, there might also be a corres¬
ponding J value to give the creature’s motion a vertical component
as well.
      The averaging process is generally going to create some
decimal values. These are corrected by assigning a particular
integer value in lines 135 and 140 of the GAMMA FUNCTION
subroutine. If an I or J value (encoded) is less than 3, the number 2
is substituted for it. An averaged motion component having a value
less than 3 indicates a motion to the left for I components or a
motion upward for J components. Substituting the value 2 simply
sets a nice, in-the-middle, integer value that retains the proper
phase without causing motions which are espec*ally fast or slow.

286


===== PDF PAGE 289 =====

      The same sort of treatment applies to averaged response
values greater than 3. The indication in ±is case is positive I or J
values, and the system assigns a middle-of-the-road integer value
of 4.
      This marks the conclusion of the first part of the GAMMA
FUNCTION subroutine featured in this book. What you have here
is a set of typical responses to situations that have been encoun¬
tered and solved successfully in the past. The next major step is to
search the memory again, classifying the address phases just as
before. This time, however, the system is looking for addresses
carrying very low confidence levels, 0 or 1 to be specific.
      Upon finding an address carrying a very low confidence level,
the system looks at the typical responses to that sort of contact
situation. If none are available from the first part of the job, the
system goes on to the next address. The implication is that there is
no confident information related to the situation at hand.
      If, on the other hand, some compiled values of I or J are
available for a low-confidence situation, those suggested values are
loaded into the creature’s memory and the confidence level is set at
1. The machine has successfully compiled a suggested motion code
for one part of a particular address phase and inserted it as a
possible motion code for a low-confidence situation within that
same contact phase.
      When the GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine is completely
done, you have sets of high-confidence responses inserted into
places of very low confidence within the same address phase. The
system has taken the things it knows with great certainty and
generalized it to similar circumstances where the creature has very
low or, indeed, absolutely no certainity.
      Note that the generalization process never raises the confi¬
dence level above 1. It can raise it from 0 to 1, but no higher than
that. The purpose, here is to avoid the possibility of having the
system build up very high confidence levels on the basis of conjec¬
ture alone. Confidence levels can be raised to 3 or 4 only by direct
experience with the corresponding situations, and that takes place
in the GAMMA CONL subroutine.
      What’s more, holding generalized confidence levels to a value
of 1 allows the creature to adjust the generalized responses when
new, high-confidence information becomes available. The
generalization scheme, in other words, tends to optimize itself
with additional experience in the environment.
      But again, this is only one of many possible GAMMA FUNC¬
TION schemes. The one described here is applicable to relatively

                                                                287


===== PDF PAGE 290 =====

small memories and a limited range of possible responses. You can
be sure there are better schemes for larger systems. Alternate
GAMMA GEN schemes are different, not only in their program¬
ming details, but also in ±eir broader approach to the generaliza¬
tion problem.
     One day soon, our lab here will be turning out a sophisticated
Level-Ill GAMMA GEN scheme—one operating in conjuncton
with two or more elements of adaptive intelligence. There will be
one GAMMA system running the creature’s overt activities, but
that GAMMA system, itself, will be controlled by a separate BETA
mechanism. In essence, the system will learn how to learn on its
own.

COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTING
10 REM tm GAMMA-i MASTER-1 *»

15 CLS:DIMM< 5»5»3):DIMG<8f2):DIMK(8)

20 FORN=1T05:FORM=1T05:FORO=1T03:M(M»N»0)=0:NEXT0f
    MfN ;GOSUB5SO:GOSUB600

25 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

30 IFCO=OTHEN40

35 C=C+1XGOSUB450 XG0SUB200:GOSUB800 XIFGF*1THEN45

40 GOSUB450JGOT025

45 gosubioo:goto25

100 REM ** GAMMA GEN-1 »»

105 P0KE16325 r 35 XFORK=1T08:K( K )=0 XF0RL=1T02 J G< K f L >
     »0:NEXTLfK:FORMI*lT05:FORMJ
*1T05:G0SUB184:IFM< MIfMJ»3 )<4THEN115

110 K< GP )=K( GP )+l :G( GPf 1 )=G( GP» 1 )+M( MI»MJf 1 )5G< CPr
    2)=G<GPf2)+M(MI»MJf2)

115 NEXTMJfMI

120 FORGP=1T08:FORGQ=1T02

125 IFG( GPfGQ )=OORK<GP)=OTHEN145

130 G(GPfGQ)=G<GP>GQ)/K<GP)

135 IFG(GPfGQ)<3THENG(GPfGQ)=2

140 IFG< GP f GQ »3THENG( GP»GQ )*4

145 NEXTGQrGP

150 G0TO160


288


===== PDF PAGE 291 =====

155 G(GP»GQ)=0:GOT0145

160 FORHI=1T05:FORMJ=1T05:GOSUB184

165 IFM(MI,MJ^3»10RG(GP»1 )=OORG(GPr2)=OTHEN175

170             )=G<GPfl ):M(HI»MJ»2)=G(GPf2):M(MIfMJ;*3)=l

175 NEXTMJ»MI

180 gosubiooo:pokei6325»32:gf=o;return

182 REM *# GAMMA PHASE-1 t*

184 IFMI<3ANDMJ<3GP=1

186 IFMI<3ANDMJ=3GP=2

188 IFMI<3ANDM.J>3GP=3
190 IFMI=3ANDMJ<3GP=4

192 IFMI=3ANDM.J>3GP=5

194 IFMI>3ANriMJ<3GP*6

196 IFMI>3ANDM.J=3GP=7

198 IFMI>3ANDMJ>3GP=8

199 RETURN

200 REM ** GAMMA CONL-1 **
205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:KL=M( MI>MJf3):iFKL=0THEN245

210 RI=M(MI»MJrl ):RJ=M(MI»MJ»2)

215 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

220 IFCO=OTHEN250

225 C=C+i:iFKL=OTHEN240

230 KL=KL-i:iFKL=0THEN245

235 IFKL=3THEN215

240 GF=1:G0T0215

245 GOSUB450IGOSUB650IKL*!IG0T0215

250 IFKL<4THEN255ELSE270

255 KL=KL+i:iFKL=4THEN260ELSE265

260 GF=1

265 M< MIrMJr1 )=RIJM(MI»MJf2 )=RJ:M< HI»MJ»3 )*KL:D*D+1:G0SU
    biooo:return
270 KL=4:G0T0265

450 REM      BLINK-1 »»


                                                          289


===== PDF PAGE 292 =====

455 SET( X»Y ):SET( X+1»Y ):RESET(XfY ):RESET( X+1»Y )

460 RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD-2 tt

552 Fl=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193tF4=16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:POKEF f176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64 tPOKEF,191tNEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEFf191:NEXT
575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-2

610   x=io:y=io:i=i:j=i
615   c=o;d=o
620 RETURN

650 REM         FETCH NEW-1 **

660 RI=RND(5):RJ=RND<5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I)tF0RYP=1T01+ABS( J )

735 IFP0INT(X+SGN( I )*XPfY+SGN(J )*YP )=-lTHEN750
740 NEXTtNEXT

745 co=o:return

750 C0=1:RETURN

800 REM )tc>K UD SCORE-1 ##

805

810 E=D/C                           1000 REM »» SHOW MEM-1

850 PRINTei5f"NO. CONTACTS"         1010 W=16327

852 PRINT@35»"N0. GOOD MOVES"       1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05:

853 PRINT(355» "SCORE"               F0R0=1T02

855 PRINTe87»C:PRINT01()8»D          1020 P0KEU»127+M( MrNfO)

860 PRINTeil9»USINGU$;E              1025 u=u+i:next:next:next

865 RETURN                           1030 return


290


===== PDF PAGE 293 =====

                    Testing Gamma-I’s
                                 Adaptability
                                                             < >    '•



                                                             L
 The program in Chapter 14 illustrates the workings of a basic
 GAMMA-I creature, but it does not afford any chance to study the
 superb adaptive qualities of a Gamma-Class machine. Hence, the
purpose of this chapter.
       The first program allows you to enter the GAMMA scheme at
 will, disturbing the creature’s motion by entering any valid values
 of I and J from the keyboard. The second program runs the long-
 range, 24-phase compiling experiment, stopping for your attention
at contacts 5 and 25 in each phase. Actually, these two programs
 parallel the two disturbance programs already described in Chap¬
ter 13.
      The purpose of the first program in this chapter is to give you a
chance to upset the creature’s knowledge of the environment and
observe the adaptive trauma in detail—if you can find any such
thing. Most GAMMA creatures anticipate a good many distur¬
bances, and you often have trouble finding one that isn’t at least
partly covered by an earlier generalization operation.
      Aside from this primary purpose, the first program also lets
you “train” a GAMMA creature. Indeed, it is defeating the whole
philosophy of evolutionary adaptive machine intelligence to pro¬
gram any sort of overt behavior, but in a sense, the training
procedures outlined for this GAMMA creature don’t tell the crea¬
ture exactly what it is supposed to do. Rather, it forces the creature
to deal with one particular contact situation, and nothing else, until
its confidence reaches the highest possible level. By selecting the
training steps very carefully, you’ll find that the creature can be
taught to deal with all possible contingencies on the basis of a
relatively few training steps.
      The purpose of the second program in this chapter is to
generate the primary adaptive learning curve for GAMMA-I crea¬
tures. Like its BETA CONL counterpart in Chapter 13, this is a

                                                                   291


===== PDF PAGE 294 =====

long and tedious affair. However, the payoff is indisputable evi¬
dence that you are on the right track with evolutionary adaptive
intelligence.

GAMMA-1 WITH MANUAL DISTURB
     This program, GAMMA-I WITH MANUAL DISTURB, is a
variation of GAMMA-I BASIC presented in Chapter 14. To get
things started, load GAMMA-I BASIC from your cassette tape and
revise the master program to look like this one:

10 REM ** GAMMA-I MASTER-2 ♦*
15 CLS:DIMM(5,5,3):DIMG(8,2):DIMK(8)
20 FORN=1TO5:FORM=1TO5:FORO=1TO3:M{M,N,O)=0NEXTO,M,N:
22 GOSUB550
25 X=X-l-l:Y=Y+J:GOSUB725
30 IFCO=0THEN40
35GOSUB800:IFGF=IFGF=1THEN45
40 GOSUB450:IFINKEY$<>::D:;THEN25ELSE50
45 GOSUB100:GOTO25
50 CLS:INPUT“NEW l,J”:l,J:CLS:X=45;Y=25:C=0:D=0:GOTO22

That’s all there is to the new program. Save it on cassette tape for
later use. Then start having some fun with it.
      Run the program and watch it work for awhile. Give the
creature a chance to establish a habit pattern of motion and run
through its cycles of GAMMA learning, learning operations signal¬
led by a complete lack of creature activity on the screen and a pound
sign appearing at the left-hand end of the memory map drawing on
the screen. If you encounter any problems with the program,
consult the composite listing at the end of this chapter.
      After letting the creature learn its way around and do some
generalizing of its confident know-how, strike the D key. This
enables the disturbance mechanism. According to line 50 in the
revised program, the screen will clear and the message NEW I, J
will appear in the upper right-hand comer. Respond to the message
with your selection of I and J values, typing them as an I value,
followed by a comma, and the J value. You must enter valid values
of I and J because the program has no provisions for goof-proofing
your entry. Consult Fig. 13-9 for a complete listing of valid distur¬
bance values.
      As mentioned earlier, you might have some trouble finding a
disturbance code that really upsets the GAMMA creature, provid¬
ing you have given it ample opportunity to learn its way around
initially. Finding it difficult to come up with a disturbance code that
upsets the creature’s scoring is not a bad thing, however. That’s

292


===== PDF PAGE 295 =====

what you want a GAMMA to do— take what it knows, generalize it
to situations not yet encountered on a first-hand basis, then arrive
at some theories concerning how those situations might be handled
when they come about.
      There is always a good chance that a GAMMA creature has
some weaknesses in its storehouse of knowledge and experience.
The problem is finding those weaknesses and using them to trip up
the little monster. If you have trouble finding them, look at it this
way—maybe you’ve created a creature that is smarter than you
are. At least, it is elusive to the point where you’re having trouble
outsmarting it.
      Use this program to gather some data and draw curves show¬
ing GAMMA-I working under stress. Find one of those disturbance
codes that throw the creature into an adaptive trauma and gather as
many figures as you can, showing the SCORE as a function of NO.
CONTACTS.
TRAINING A GAMMA-1
      It is possible to train a GAMMA-I creature to deal with future
circumstances in a rational way. The idea is to start out with a fresh
creature and before it has a chance to make its first border contact,
interrupt its motion to enter a disturbance code from one of the
eight fundamental GAMMA FUNCTION families. This kind of
action on your part forces the creature to deal with that motion
code, and not one picked on its own.
      Disturb the creature’s response, whatever it might be, before
it has a chance to make another contact. Enter the same motion
code and disturb it again before a contact occurs. Continue this
training session until the creature does its GAMMA generalization
operation, filling up the entire contact phase you have chosed with
the one response it has been using.
     Hitting the creature with the same motion code three times in
succession, and interrupting the motion before a contact occurs,
forces GAMMA generalization to occur in one major section of the
memory. All other contact situations in that same phase take on the
creature’s selected response.
      After the system completes that first generalization opera¬
tion, and before the critter has a chance to make contact with the
border figure, strike theD key again. This time, however, enter a
motion code from a different contact phase. Continue this sequence
until a new GAMMA operation occurs.
      Here is a suggested list of motion codes for running this sort of
training session:

                                                                  293


===== PDF PAGE 296 =====

                    I=-2, J=-2       1=0, J=2
                    I=-2, J=0        1=2, J=-2
                    I=-2, J=2        1=2, J=0
                    1=0 j=-2         1=2, J=2

     Included is one motion code from each of the contact phases in
the GAMMA FUNCTION scheme. So if you force the creature to
respond to each of these codes 3 times in succession, you will find
the entire memory map filling up with information.
     Then turn the little guy loose in his environment. Every
response he makes will come from either a high-confidence, direct
experience from the past or generalized information from such
experiences. The creature might make some mistakes after you
turn him loose; then again, he might not. It isn’t a perfect creature,
but after undergoing your extensive training routine, it is about as
prepared for the world as it can be.

GAMMA-1 WITH SEMI-AUTOMATIC COMPILE
      By this time, the prospect of running a bunch of creatures
through their paces and keeping track of their scores has become a
routine matter. In this case, a GAMMA critter is allowed to learn
his way around the world on the screen, and when it appears all the
GAMMA functions have done their job, the creature is subjected to
24 sets of disturbance tests.
      The chart back in Fig. 13-9 serves this purpose quite well,
providing both the list of valid disturbance codes and some spaces
for recording the SCORE figure at 5 and 25 contacts in each case.
      There is little more to be added to the discussion about
running BETA-I WITH CONFIDENCE COMPILE. This program
runs the same way. This one includes the GAMMA FUNCTION of
course, and the master program has to be rewritten to accommo¬
date that feature.
      There is one matter of very special importance to experimen¬
ters using systems having less than 16k of memory—YOU MUST
ENTER A CLEAR 16 BEFORE RUNNING THIS PROGRAM.
Memory space is very tight on a 4K system and doing a CLEAR 16
is one tricky little way to pick up some more program memory
space. You might have noticed in your Level II manual for the
TRS-80 that the system automatically allocates 50 bytes for string
memory space. It so happens that this program uses very little
string space, so the space can be reduced to 16 by doing that
CLEAR 16 command.

294


===== PDF PAGE 297 =====

Fig. 15-1. Flowchart for GAMMA-I COMPILE master program.

     In an effort to fit the program into a 4K computer format, some
of the subroutines have been rewritten in shorter forms. Also, the
BLINK subroutine must be eliminated and replaced by a different
version inserted into the main program.
     Figure 15-1 is the flowchart for the main program sequence.
You should see that it is a rather straightfoward combination of two
flowcharts you have already studied in some detail: the master-
program flowchart for GAMMA-I BASIC in Fig. 14-1 and the
master-program flowchart for BETA-I CONFIDENCE COMPILE
in Fig. 13-6.

                                                               295


===== PDF PAGE 298 =====

     Here are the listings for the portions of the program that are
different from GAMMA-I BASIC in chapter 14. Load that program
into your computer, then make these additions and modifications.
 10 REM ** GAMMA-1 MASTER-3 **
 15 CLS:DIMM(5,5,3):DIMG(8,2):DIMK(8):F0RN=1T05:F0RM=1 TO
     5:FORO=1T 03:M(M,N,O)=0:NEXTO,M,N:GOSUB600
 2OGOSUB550
 25 X=X-HI:Y=Y-hJ:GOSUB725
 30 IFCO=0THEN55
 35 C=C+1 :IFC=50ORC=25ORFD=1THEN65
 40 GOSUB200:IFC=Cn'HEN20
 45 GOSUB800:IFGF=1THEN50ELSE 55
 50 GOSUB100:GOTO25
 55 SET(X,Y):SET(X-h1,Y):RESET(X.Y):RESET(X-I-1,Y):IFINKEY$=::D;;
    THEN6 0ELSE25
 60 FD=1 :G0T025
 65 FD=0:GOSUB300:IFC=0THEN20ELSE40
 200 REM GAMMA CONL-2 ♦*
 205 MI=I-H3:MJ=J-H3;KL=M(MI,MJ,3):IFKL=0THEN245
 210 RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2)
 215I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:GOSUB725:IFCO=0THEN250
 220 C=C+1 :IFC=50ORC=25THEN275
 225 IFKL=0THEN245
 230 KL=KL-1 :IFKL=0THEN245
 235 IFKL=3THEN240ELSE215
 240GF=1:GOTO215
 245 GOSUB650:KL=t:GOTO215
 250 IFKL4THEN255ELSE270
 255 KL=KL-h1 :IFKL=4THEN260ELSE265
 260 GF=1
 265 M(MI, MJ. 1)=RI:M(MI, MJ. 2) = RJ:M (Ml. MJ, 3) = KL: D=D+1: GOSUB
       000:RETURN
  270 KL=:G0T0265
  275 GOSUB300:IFC=0RETURN
  280 G0T0225
 600 REM ** INITIAL-3A **
 61OGOSUB650:X=25-l-RI:Y=25-f-RJ:GOSUB650!l=RI-3:J=3:RETURN
 650 REM •• FETCH NEW-1A **
 660 RI=RND(5);RJ=RND(5):IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660
 670 RETURN
 800 REM *• UD SCORE-1 A **
 850 PRINT® 15“,NO.CONTACTS”;PRINT@35, "NO. GOOD MOVES”
      :PRINT@55,”SCORE’’:PRINT 87,C:PRINT 108,D:PRINT@119,USING
      "#.##’’;D/C:RETURN
1000 REM ** SHOW MEM-1 A **
1010 W=16327:FORM=1 TO 5: FORN=1T05: FORO=1 TO 2: POKEW, 127
       + M(M,N,0):W=W-l-1;NEXTO, N,M:RETURN
     Now, compare your overall listing with the composite listing
at the end of this chapter, deleting the lines that do not appear
there. This deleting operation is absolutely essential if you are
using a 4K system, and don’t forget to enter a CLEAR 16 before
attempting to run the program.

296


===== PDF PAGE 299 =====

      From the program for as many creatures as your time and
patience allow. Average the results at contacts 5 and 25 for each of
the 24 disturbance tests and then graph the results in the usual
fashion.
      You might want to keep the raw numbers, however. Some
 later time you will find it necessary to run the experiment a few
more times and the new data can be compiled with the old, thereby
creating a graph that has even better statistical significance.
COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS
GAMMA-1 WITH MANUAL DISTURB Listing
10 RtH     GAMMA-1 MASTER-2 **

15 CLS:DIMM(5»5»3 ):DIMG( 8»2 ):DIMK( 8)

20 F0RN = lT05:F0RM=lT05tFQR0=lT03:M< M»N»0 )=0;NEXT0tM»N
   ;gosub6oo
22 G0SUB55()

25 X=X+I:Y=Y+J:G0SUB725

30 IFCO=0THEN40

35 C=C+1:GOSUB450 t G0SUB200:GOSUB800:IFGF=1THEN45

40 G0SUB450:IFINKEY$<>"D"THEN25ELSE50

45 G0SUB100:G0T025
50 CLs:INPUT"NEW I»j"jIfjICLS;x=45:Y=25:c=o:d=o:G0T022

100 REM       GAMMA GEN-1 **
105 P0KE16325»35:F0RK=1T08:K< K )=0:F0RL=1T02:G( KfL >=0
     :NEXTLfK:F0RMI*lT05:FORMJ =1T05:G0SUB184:IFM(MIrMJ»3 )
     <4THEN115
110 K(GP)=K(GP)+1:G(GP»1 )=G(GPrl )+M(MI»MJ»l )
    :G(GP»2 )=G(GP»2)+M(MI»MJf2)
115 NEXTMJtMI

120 F0RGP=1T08:F0RGQ=1T02

125 IFG( GPfGQ )=00RK( GP)=0THEN145

130 G(GPfGQ )=G<GPfGQ)/K( GP)

135 IFG<GP»GQ)<3THENG(GP»GQ)=2

140 IFG(GPfGQ )>3THENG( GPfGQ)=4

145 NEXTGQ»GP
150 GOT0160

155 G(GPiGQ )=0:G0T0145

160 F0RMI=1T05:F0RMJ=1T05;G0SUB184

165 IFM( MI>MJ»3 )>10RG(GPf1 )=00RG(GPf2 )s0THEN175


                                                               297


===== PDF PAGE 300 =====

170 MCHIfMJrl )=G<GP»1 ):M( hifMJ»2 )=G( GP>2);M<MItMJf3 )*1

175 NEXTMJtMI

180 GOSUB1000:POKE16325»32:GF=0:RETURN

182 REM tw. GAMMA PHASE-1

184 IFMI<3ANriM.J<3GP=l

136 ;tFMI<3ANDMJ=3GP=2
188 IFMI<3ANDM.J>3GP=3

190   IFMI = 3ANDM.J<3GP=4

192 IFMI=3ANDMJ>3GP=5

194 IFMI>3ANDMJ<3GP=6

196 IFMI>3ANDMJ=3GP=7

198 IFMI>3ANDM.J>3GP=8

199 RETURN

200 REM       GAMMA CONL-1 t*

205 MI=I+3:MJ=J+3:KL=M(MI»MJf3);iFKL=0THEN245

210 RI=M( MlfMJrl ):R.J=M( MIfMJ»2 )

215 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3:G0SUB725

220 IFC0=0THEN250

225 C=C+1:IFKL=0THEN240

230 KL=KL-i:iFKL=0THEN245

235 IFKL=3THEN215

240 GF=1:G0T0215

245 G0SUB450:G0SUB650:KL=1:GOT0215

250 IFKL<4THEN255ELSE270

255 KL=KL+1tIFKL=4THEN260ELSE265

260 GF=1

265 M(MI»MJ,1 )=R11 M( MI»MJ,2 )=RJ tM(MIf MJ13)=KLID=D+1
    tGOSUBlOOOJRETURN

270 KL=4tG0T0265

450 REM 4* BLINK-1 **

455 set(XtY):set(x+i,y):reset(x»y):reset(x+i»y )

460 RETURN


298


===== PDF PAGE 301 =====

550 REM       FIELD-2 *»

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4s16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2tP0KEF»13i:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEFf191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ♦» INITIAL-2 tt

610 x=io:y*io:i=i:j*i

615 C=0JD=0

620 RETURN

650 REM       FETCH NEW-1 »*

660 RI=RND(5)tRJ=RND(5)

665 IFRI=3ANDRJ»3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM »* CON SENSE-1

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS( I ):F0RYP*=1T01+ABS( J )

735 IFP0INT(X+SGN(I )»XPfY+SGN< J McYP )»-1THEN750

740 next:NEXT

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 co=i:return

800 REM »» UD SCORE-1 **

805 U$="**#**"

810 E=D/C

850 PRINTei5»"N0* CONTACTS"

852 PRINTI?35»“N0. GOOD MOVES"

853 PRINTe55»"SCORE"

855 PRINTe87>C:PRINT01O8fD

860 PRINTeil9fUSINGU$JE

865 RETURN

1000 REM ** SHOU MEM-1 **



                                                     299


===== PDF PAGE 302 =====

1010 W=16327

1015 FORM=1T05:FORN=1T05JFORO®1T02

1020 P0KEW»127+M(M»N»0)

1025 u=u+i:next:next:next

1030 RETURN
GAMMA-1 WITH SEMI-AUTO COMPILE Listing

10 RLh tt. GAMBIA i MAGTER -3
15 clg;dimm( 5,5,3 ):ciMG( 8,2 )iDiMK( 8 ):forn=ito5:forh=i
      T05:F0R0 = lT03tM( M,N»0 )«=0 1NEXTO, M,N :GOSUB600
20 G0SUD550

25 X==X » i:Y = Y-i.j:G0SUB725

30 IFC0=0THEN55

35 C^C J1: IFC=50RC=^250RFD=1THEN65

40 GOSUB200:iFC=OTHEN20

45 GOGUB800:IFGF=1THEN50ELSE55

50 gosubioo:goto25

55 SCT( X,Y ):SET(X+l,Y)JRESET(X,Y)JRESET(X+lfY)
      :IFINKEY$="D''THEN60ELSE25

60 FD=1:G0T025

65 FD=0 :GOSUEt3001 IFC=0THEN20ELSE40

100 REH ** GAMMA GEN-1

105 P0KE16325,35:F0RK=1T08:K( K )=0:F0RL=1T02:G( KfL )*0
       ; NEXTL,K:F0RMI*1T05:F0RMJ ==lT05:G0SUB184:iFM<MIfMJ»3 )
    <4THEN115
110 K(GP )=K( GP)fi:G(GP,l )*G(GPfl )+M( MI,MJr 1 ):G( GP,2 )=G
       (GPf2)4M(MIfMJf2 )
115 NEXTMJtMI

120 F0RGP=1T08:F0RGQ=1T02

125 IFG(GP,GQ )=OORK( GP)=0THEN145

130 G(GP,GQ )=G(GP,GQ)/K( GP)

135 IFG(GP,GQ )<3THENG( GP,GQ)=2

140    IFG(GP,GQ )>3THENG( GP,GQ)=4

145 NEXTGQ,GP

150 GOTO160


300


===== PDF PAGE 303 =====

Icr rr
 sJ%J  G( GPfGQ ) = 0:GOT0145

160 r0RMI=::lT05:F0RM.J = lT05:GOSUB184

16Z irM( MItHJ,3 )>10RG( GP,1 )=00RG< GP»2 )=0THEN175

.1.70 M( MlyMJ, 1 )=G( GPrl ):M(MIfMJy2 )=G(GPf2 ):M(MI»HJt3)=1

175 NCXTMJyMI
ISO GQ3UB1000:POKE16325f32:GF=0:RETURN

1S2 REM       GAMMA PHASE-1 »»

184 IFMI<3ANDM.J<3GP=1

136 IFMI<3ANDMJ=3GP=2

188 IFMI<3ANDMJ>3GP=3

190   irMI=3ANDMJ<3GP=4

192 irMI=3ANDMJ>3GP=5

194 IFMI>3ANriMJ<3GP=6

196 IFMI>3ANDMJ=3GP=7

198 IFMI>3ANDMJ>3GP=8

199 RETURN

200 REM       GAMMA CONL-2 tt

205 MI = 113:MJ=J+3:KL=M( MI»MJ»3 ) JIFKL=0THEN245

210 RI=M( MIyMJ»l ):RJ=M(MI»MJ»2)

215 I=RI-3:J=RJ-3;G0SUB725:IFCO=OTHEN250

220 C=C+1:IFC=50RC=25THEN275

  W   IFKL=0THEN245

230 KL=KL-1:IFKL=0THEN245

235 IFKL=3THEN240ELSE215

240 GF==1;G0T0215

245 GOSUB650 :kl=i;goto215

250   IFKL<4THEN255ELSE270

255 KL=KL+1:IFKL=4THEN260ELSE265

260 GF=1

265 M(MlyMJfl )=RI:M(MIyMJr2 )=RJ:M(MI»MJr3 )-KL
    tD^D-t-UGOSUBlOOO tRETURN
270 KL=4:GOT0265


                                                              301


===== PDF PAGE 304 =====

275 GOSUB300tIFC=()RETURN

280 GQT0225

300 REM tan STOP-1 **

305 D=DM:GOSUB800:INPUTS$
310   irc;. ^ 25THEN320

315 D=ri i:cl5:gosub55o;return

320 CLG: INPUT'-niSTURB (Y OR N)”»S$

325 IF3$="N"THEN315

330 INPUT"NEW I»J"»Irj:c=o:d=o:x=45;y=25:cls:return

550 REM m FIELD-2

552 F1=15553:F2=15615:F3=16193:F4=16255

555 F0RF=FlT0F2:P0KEFyl3i:NEXT

560 F0RF=F3T0F4:P0KEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=F1T0F4STEP641POKEF ^191:NEXT

570 F0RF=F2T0F4STEP64:POKEF>1911NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL-3A

610 G0SUB650tX=25+Ri:Y=25+RJ:G0SUB650:i*RI“3SJ*RJ-3JRETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU-IA

660 RI=RND< 5 ):RJ=RND< 5 ):IFRI=3ANDRJ=3THEN660

670 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE-1 *t

730 F0RXP=2T02+ABS(I):F0RYP=1T01+ABS< J)

735 IFPOINT(X+SGN(I )»XPfY+SGN(J )»YP )*-lTHEN750

740 next:NEXT

745 C0=0:RETURN

750 CO=i:RETURN

800 REM 4* UD SCORE-IA ♦*
850 PRINTei5»”N0. CONTACTS"IPRINTSSSr"NO* GOOD MOVES"
     :PRINTe55»"SCORE" tPRINTi 87»C:pRINTei08»D:PRINTeil9»
     USING"#*##"»d/c;return.
1000 REM *4 SHOW MEM-IA tt
1010 U=16327:FORM=1T05:FORN=lT051F0R0=1T02 tPOKEU t
      127 + M(M»N»0 ):W=W+i:NEXTOfNtM:RETURN


302


===== PDF PAGE 305 =====

                                                              16
                          A Crash Course
              In EAMI Programming

By the time you get to this part of the work, you should have a
pretty good idea about how KAMI works and how the programs
themselves demonstrate EAMI and offer chances to discover new
things about it.
      The main purpose of the programs in this chapter is to pull
together the complete EAMI system as it has been presented so far
in this book. The programs are much tighter, run faster, and work
more efficiently than any of the others. There are no special frills,
however, so you will have to understand everything that’s gone
before in order to understand what is happening here.
      The advantage of using the programming scheme in this chap¬
ter is ±at it lets you get a complete set of EAMI demonstration
programs compacted into a relatively small section of cassette
tape. You will then be able to load the programs from the tape in
rather rapid succession, perhaps getting a clearer overall view of
the EAMI process than is possible with the more elaborate ver¬
sions.
      The programs appear here with virtually no theory of opera¬
tion. By this time, you have had enough experience with the basic
EAMI concepts and programming procedures to run through the
whole thing without making a lot of explanatory detours.

ALPHA-IG
      Figure 16-1 shows the flowchart for a highly compacted ver¬
sion of ALPHA-I. K you get a little lost in your own analysis of the
theory of operation, check the work against a similar sort of ap¬
proach for ALPHA-II CONVERSION DEMO in Chapter 8.
      This program must be entered all the way and from scratch.
While the subroutine numbers will appear quite familiar, you will
note that the statements are written somewhat differently. The use
of a lot of POKE graphics makes it important to save the program
on cassette tape before trying it on the machine.

                                                                303


===== PDF PAGE 306 =====

10 REM ♦♦ ALPHA-IG MASTER **
15 CLS:PRINT@ 0,“*ALPHA-r”:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN35
25 C=C+1:GOSUB650:I=RI-2:J=RJ-:GOSUB725:IFCO<>32 THEN 25
30 D=D+1:GOSUB800
35 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN10ELSE20

400 REM ♦* MOVE 11-1 **
405 POKENP, 32:NP=NP-I-I+64*J:POKENP,140:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD 11-1 **
555 FORF=15553T015615:POKEF,131 :NEXT
560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEF,176:NEXT
565 F0RF=15553T01655STEP64:P0KEF,191 :NEXT
570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF,191 :NEXT
575 RETURN

600 REM ♦♦ INITIAL IIG-1 **
605 NP=15968:GOSUB650:I=RI-2:J=RJ-2:C=0:D=0:RETURN

650 REM   FETCH NEW IIG-1 **
655 RI=RND(5)-1 :RJ=RND(5)-1 :IFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655
660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE 11-1 **
730 F0RSI=ABS(I)T01STEP-1 :F0RSJ=ABS(J)T01STEP-1
735 CO=PEEK (NP+SI*SGN(l)-h64*SJ*SGN(J))
740 IFC0O32RETURN
745 NEXTSJ.SLRETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE IIG-1 **
810 PRINT® 13, @ “NO. CONTACTS’’:PRINT @30, “NO.GOODMOVE-
    S”:PRINT@50,’’
815PRINT$79,C:PRINT@99,D;PRINT@114,USING“###”;D/C:PRINT
    125,CH R$(C1)
820 RETURN

      Once you get the program running, you’ll find you can disturb
the creature’s activity and reset the scoring figures by simply
striking the D key.

ALPHA-IIG
      The flowchart for an ALPHA-II Program appears in Fig. 16-2.
It is a no-nonsense version of the ALPHA-II CONVERSION
DEMO program in Chapter 8. Like the ALPHAIG program des¬
cribed in the previous section of this chapter, the creature can be
disturbed at any time by striking!) key. The obstacles, incidental¬
ly, are the same ones used in earlier Level-II programs.
      The program can be loaded into your computer by building it
around the ALPHA-IIG program. Simple revise the master pro¬
gram and add the figure-drawing subroutine as shown here:

304


===== PDF PAGE 307 =====

Fig. 16-1. Flowchart for ALPHA-IG.   Fig. 16-2. Flowchart for ALPHA-IIG-


10 REM ** ALPHA-IIG MASTER
15CLS:PRINT@O,“*ALPHA-II*”:PRINT@60,“FIG.”15;GOSUB550:GOSUB
   675:GOSUB600
20 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN35
25 Cl =CO:C=C-h1 :GOSUB650:l=RI-2:J=2:GOSUB725:IFCO
   <>°32THEN25
30 D=D-l-1:GOSUB 00
36 GSOBU400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN10ELSE20

675 REM **FIGS 11-1**
677 P=15755
680 FORF=0TO1 ;FORN=P-l-64*F+8:POKEN,35:NEXTN,F
682 FORF=0TO1 ;FORN=P+32+64*FTOP-l-40-h64*F:POKEN,48:NEXTN,F
684 F0RF=^n'01:F0RN=P = 192 +64* FTOP + 200 + 64* F: POKEN,42:
    NEXTN.F
686 FORF=0TO1 :FORN=P+224+64*FTOP+232+64*POKEN,37;NEXTN,F
690 RETURN

     Save it on cassette tape, and you’re ready to go. If you run
into any difficulties, compare your program listing with the
composite version at the end of this chapter.

                                                                   305


===== PDF PAGE 308 =====

BETA-IG
     You can now extend this logical sequence of program evolu¬
tion by preparing the compacted version of BETA-I. The flowchart
is in Fig. 16-3. Though this is a BETA-I creature program, it
follows the general procedures outlined for BETA-II CONVER¬
SION DEMO in Chapter 12.
     The simplest way to get this new program into your machine is
by building it around the ALPHA-IG version presented in the first
section of this chapter. So load ALPHA-IG from cassette tape and
then modify the master program as follows:
10 REM     BETA-IG MASTER **
15DIMM(4,4,2)
20 CLSiPRINT 0,“*BETA-r”:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
25 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN45
30 C=C+1: MI=H-2: MJ=J+2:RI=M(MI,MJ,1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2);KL=M(MI,
   MJ,0):IFKL=0THEN50
35 l=RI-2:J=RJ-2:GOSUB725:IFCO<>32THEN55
4OD=D+1:GOSUB800
45 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN20ELSE25
50 GOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,1)=R1:M(MI,MJ,2)=RJ:M(MI,MJ,0)=1 :G0T035
55 C=C-f-1 :GOTO50

       Again, save the program on cassette tape before actually
running it.
      You might have noticed from the flowchart (and you’ll cer¬
tainly notice when you run the program) that there is no SHOW
MEMORY operation. This particular operation, used with virtually
all the BETA programs described earlier in this book, bums up a lot
of program execution time and thus slows down the action of the
creature. Omitting this operation here lets the creature work faster
and develop its habit pattern of motion a lot sooner.
BETA-IIG
     This method of using highly compacted programs shows its
real advantage in the case of this BETA-II program. The BETA-II
programs presented in earlier chapters were capable of sensing the
qualities of only two different obstacles and the border figure. The
program space gained by using compacted programs allows the
creature to sense and respond differently to all the figures on the
screen.
     This BETA-II program can be loaded on top of the ALPHA-IIG
program outlined earlier in this chapter. Doing it this way, you only
have to modify the master program and add the DISCERN CON¬
TACT sensing subroutine, S.900. They are:
10 REM ** BETA-IIG MASTER *•
15DIMM(4,4,4.2)


306


===== PDF PAGE 309 =====

20 CLS:PRINT00,“*BETA-ll*”:PRINT (a60,“FIG.”:GOSUB550:GOSUB675:
   GOSUB600
25 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN45
3OC=C+1;C1=CO:GOSUB900:MI=l+2:MJ=J+2:RI=M(MI,MJ,B,t):RJ=M
   (MI,MJ,B,2):IFM(MI,MJ,B,0)=OTHEN50
35 l=RI-2;J=RJ-2:GOSUB725:IFCO 32THEN55
4OD=D+1;GOSUB800
45 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN20ELSE25
5OGOSUB650:M(MI,MJ,B,1)=RI:M(MI,MJ,B,2)=RJ:M(MI,MJ,B.0)=1:
   G0T035
55 C=C+1 :GOTO50




Fig. 16-3. Flowchart for BETA-IG.

                                                           307


===== PDF PAGE 310 =====

900 REM ** CON EVAL IIG-1 **
905 IFCO=131 ORCO=1760RC0=191THEN930
910 IFCO=35THEN935
915 ICFO=48THEN940
920 IFCO=42THEN945
925 IFCO=37THEN950
930 B=0:RETURN
935 B=1 -RETURN
940 B=2:RETURN
945 B=3:RETURN
950 B=4:RETURN




Fig. 16-4. Flowchart for BETA-IIG.

308


===== PDF PAGE 311 =====

Fig. 16-5. Flowchart for GAMMA CONL.

     Save the program on cassette tape and run it. You’ll find it
working beautifully. (Murphy’s Law actually forbids such a state¬
ment, however, so you might want to check your complete listing
against the composite version at the end of the chapter).
     Let the critter establish its unique habit pattern of motion,
then upset it by striking the D key. (Chances are good that it will
eventually find its way back to the same pattern and position on the

                                                                309


===== PDF PAGE 312 =====

                                      Fig. 16-6. Flowchart for
                                      GAMMA-IG.




Fig. 16-7. Flowchart for GAMMA-IIG.




310


===== PDF PAGE 313 =====

 screen, clearly demonstrating how a sensitivity to the differences
 in quality between obstacles serve as cues to where the creature
 happens to be moving on the screen.
 GAMMA-IG
      Building a souped-up version of the GAMMA creature pro¬
 gram calls for deleting some operations in the GAMMA CONL
 (confidence-level) subroutine. See the new GAMMA CONL
 routine flowcharted in Fig, 16-5.
      The program statements for the GAMMA FUNCTION sub¬
 routine are also quite a bit different from those described in Chap¬
 ter 14, but the flowchart operations aren’t significantly different.
 The flowchart in Fig. 16-6 represents the overall activity of this
 condensed GAMMA-I program.
      This program can be entered into the computer using the
 BETA-IG programming as a starting point. Simply rework the
 master program and enter the two new subroutines as shown here:
  10 REM *♦ GAMMA-IG MASTER **
  15 DIMM(4,4,2):DIMG(7,t):DIMK(7)
  20 CLSrPRINT @0,“*GAMMA-I*”:GOSUB550:GOSUB600
  25 GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN35
  30 C=C+1 ;GOSUB200:GOSU B800:IFGF=1 THEN40
 35 GOSUB400:IFINKEY$=“D”THEN20ELSE25
 40 GOSUB100:GOTO35
100 REM ** GAMMA-GEN G1 **
105 POKE16325,35:FORK= 0TO7:K(K)=0:FORL=0TO1 :G(K,L)=0:NEXTL,
     K: FOR Ml = 0 T04:FORMJ= 0 T04:GOSUB175:IFM{MI,MJ,0)
        4THEN115
 115NEXTMJ,MI
 120 FORGP=0TO7:FORGQ=0TO1
 125 IFK(GP)=0THEN145
 130 G(GP,GQ)=G(GP,GQ)/K(GP)
 135 IFQ(GP,GQ)<- 2G(GP,GQ)=1
 140 IFG(GP,GQ)>2G(GP,GQ)=3
 145 NEXTGQ.GP
 150 FORMI =0TO4 :FOR MJ =0TO4 ;GOSU B175
 155 IFM(MI,MH,0)>1THEN165
 160 M(MI,MJ,1)=G(GP,0):M(MI,MJ,2)=G(GP,t):M(MI,MJ,0)=1:POKE16327
      42 :POKE16327,32
 165NEXTMJ,MI
 170 POKE16325,32:GF=0:RETURN
 175 REM ♦* GAMMA PHASE-2
180 IFMI<2ANDMJ>2GP= 0
 182 IFMI<2ANDMJ=2GP=1
184 IFMI<2ANDMJ>2GP=2
186 IFMI=2ANDMJ<2GP=3
 188 IFMI=2ANDMJ>2GP=5
 190 IFM>2ANDMJ>2GP=5
192 IFMI>2ANDMJ=2GP=6
194 IFMI>2ANDMJ>2GP=7
 196 RETURN

                                                                311


===== PDF PAGE 314 =====

200REM    GAMMA CONL G-1 **
2O5MI=I+2:MJ=J+2:RI=M(MI,MJ.1):RJ=M(MI,MJ,2):KL=M(MI,MJ,0):
   IFKL=0THEN235
21OI=RI-2:J=RJ-2:GOSUB725:IFCO=32THEN240
215 C=C+1 :IFKL=0THEN235
220 KL=KL-1 :IFKL=0THEN235
225 IFKL=3THEN230ELSE210
23OGF=1:GOTO210
235 GOSUB650:KL=1 :GOTO210
240 IFKL<4THEN245ELSE255
245 KL=KL+1 :IFKL=4THEN250ELSE255
250 GF=1
255 M(MI,MJ,1)=RI:M(MI.MJ,2)=RJ:M(MI,MJ.0)=KL:D=D+1 :RETURN

A WORD ABOUT GAMMA-IIG
      Even using these program-compacting procedures, I am still
finding it difficult to work a GAMMA-H program into a 4K compu¬
ter format. Fm not saying it cannot be done, rather I haven't yet
found a good way to go about it.
      For the benefit of experimenters having systems with 16K or
more memory, or for those who think they have some ideas about
fitting the scheme into a 4K format, I have included a flowchart for
GAMMA-IIG.
      The flowchart does not call any subroutines that haven’t been
described elsewhere in this chapter, so there aren’t any serious
theoretical problems. All you have to do is write the master
program yourself. Good luck—it’s a great way to test your own
understanding of everything you’ve done so far.
COMPOSITE PROGRAM LISTINGS
ALPHA-IG Composite Listing
 10 REM ** ALFHA-iG MASTER

 15 CLSlPRINieO »"JKALPHA-I*" :G0SUB550 iGOSUB600
 20 G0SUB725:IFC0=32THEN35
 25 C=C+1:GOSUB650:I=RI-2:J==RJ-2:GOSUB725:IFCO<>32THEN25

 30 D=D+1:GOSUB800
 35 G0SUB400 : IFINKEY$="D'’THEN10ELSE20

400 REM ** MOVE II-l **

405 P0KENP»32:NP=NP+I+64*J:P0KENPf140:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEF»131;NEXT

560 F0RF==16193T016255:P0KEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF-15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT
570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64;P0KEF»191:NEXT


312


===== PDF PAGE 315 =====

S75 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL IIG-1 **

605 Np=i5968:go3ub650;i=Ri-2:j=Rj-2;c=o:d=o:return

650 REM )t(>K FETCH NEU IIG-1

655 RI=RND(5 )-lIRJ=RND( 5 )-!:IFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655

660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l

730 FORSI:^ABS( I )T01STEP-1 :F0RSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEI\( NP+3I*SGN( I )+64*SJ*SGN< J ))

740 IFC0<::32RETURN

745 nextsj»si:return

800 REM      UD score IIG-1 *»

810 PRINTei3T"N0. CONTACTS"tPRINTBSO»"NO. GOOD MOVES"1PRINT

    050»"SCORE"

815 PRINT079fC:PRINT099rD:PRINT@114fUSING"*.#*"»D/CJPRINT0
    125»CHR$(Cl )

820 RETURN

ALPHA-IIG Composite Listing

10 REM     ALPHA-ilG MASTER **

15 cls:print0or■■ *alpha-ii*" :print06o^"fig." :gosub55o ;gosub

   675:GOSUB600

20 G0SUB725:IFC0=32THEN35

25 Cl=CO:C=C+l:G0SUB650:I=RI-2:J=RJ-2:G0SUB725:IFC0<>32THEN
   25

30 D=D+1:GOSUB800

35 GOSUB400 JIFINKEY$="D"THEN10ELSE20

400 REM ** MOVE II-l *#

405 POKENP»32:NP=NP+IF64»J:POKENP»140:RETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l

555 F0RF=15553T015615tP0KEF»131;NEXT

560 FORF=16193T016255:POKEF»176:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64;P0KEF »191tNEXT


                                                            313


===== PDF PAGE 316 =====

570 F-0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL IIG-1

605 np=i5968:gosub65o:i=ri-2:j=rj-2:c=o:d=o:return

650 REM ** FETCH NEW IIG-1

655 RI=RND( 5 )-l :R..I=RND( 5 )-l: IFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM ** FIGS II-l )|c5tc

677 P=15755

680 FORF=0TOl;FORN=P+64)KFTOP+64*F+8:POKEN^35:NEXTN>F

682 FORF==OTOi:FORN=P+32+64)KFTOP+40+64)|tF:POKENf48:NEXTN»F

684 FQRF=^OT01:FORN-P+192+64*FTOP+200+64*F;POKEN»42:NEXTN»F

685 FORF=OTOi:FORN:=P+32+64*FTOP+40P64>tcF:POKEN»48:NEXTN»F

686 FORF=OTOi:FORN=P+224 + 64*FTOP+232+64)tcF:POKEN»37:NEXTN,F

690 RETURN

725 REM       CON SENSE II--1 **

730 FORSI^mABSC I )T013TEP~1 ;F0RSJ--ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SI)KSGN( I )+64*SJ*SGN< J ))

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 nextsj»si:return

800 REM ** UD SCORE IIG-1 **

810 PRINTei3»"N0. CONTACTS"tPRINTSSOr"NO* GOOD MOVES"tPRINT
      050»"SCORE”

815 PRINT079rC:PRINTe99TD:PRINTeil4»USING"***#">D/C:F*RINT0
    125fCHR$(Cl )
820 RETURN
BETA-IG Composite Listing
iO REM ** BETA-IG MASTER **

15 DIMM(4»4»2)

20 CLS;PRINTeO r"#BETA-I*":GOSUB550:GOSUB600

25 G0SUB725:iFC0=32THEN45

30 C=C+liMI = I+2:MJ=J+2tRI=M( MlfMJrl):RJ=M( MI»MJf2 )tKL=M(MI
  »MJ»0 ):IFKL=0THEN50
35 I=RI-2:J=RJ-2:G0SUB725:IFC0<>32THEN55


314


===== PDF PAGE 317 =====

40 D=D+1:GOSUB800

45 G0SUB4()0 : IFINKEY$=''D*‘THEN20ELSE25

50 GOSUB650;M(MlrMJrl )=RI:m<                )=RJ:M< MI»MJ»0 )=i:G0TO35

55 C=C+1:GOT050
400 REM ** MOVE II-l

405 POKENP r 32:NP=NP+I+64*J:POKENP»140 tRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=:15553T015615:P0KEFrl3i:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEFf176:NEXT

565 F0RF==15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191 :NEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL IIG~1 **

605 NP= 15968 IGOSUB650 : I==RI -2: .J=R J-2: C=0 : D==01 RETURN

650 REM *:>K FETCH NEW IIG-1

655 RI = RND( 5 )“1:RJ-==RND( 5 )-l t IFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655

660 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

730 F0R3I^=ABS( I )T01STEP-1 :F0RSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO^PEEK(NP+SI*SGN( I )+64*SJ#SGN( J))

7 40 IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJ»si:RETURN

300 REM 44 UD SCORE IIG-1 *4
310 PRINT013r"NO. CONTACTS":PRINT(?30r"NO*GOOD MOVES"tPRINT
    e50»"SCORE"
815 PRINTe79»C:PRINT099»D:PRINTeil4fUSING"*.#*"»D/C:PRINT0
    125»CHR$(C1 )
820 RETURN
BETA-IIG Composite Listing
10 REM 44 BETA-IIG MASTER 44

15 DIMM(4»4»4»2 )

20 CLS:PRINT0Of"4BETA-II4";PRINTe60»"FIG*"IGOSUBSSOtGOSUB

  675:G0SUB600
25 G0SUB725:iFC0=32THEN45


                                                                   315


===== PDF PAGE 318 =====

30 c=--c+i :ci=co:gosub90():mi=i+2:mj=j+2:ri=m<         ):rj=m
                 ):iFM(MI» MJfBTO )=0THEN50
35 I =RI-2: .J=R J-2 : G0SUB7251IFC0O32THEN55

40 D=D+1tGOSUBOOO

45 G(3SUB400 : IFINKEY$=="D"THEN20ELSE25
50 G0SUB650:M(MIfHJ>Br1 )=RI♦M(MI2)=2:M( MI»MJ»B» 0 )=11
   G0T035

55 C=C+ltGOT050

400 REM *■* MOVE II-l **

405 POKENP T 321NP=NP+1+64*JIPOKENP»140 tRETURN

550 REM ** FIELD II-l **

555 F0RF=15553T015615tP0KEF>13i:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193TO16255:POKEFrl76tNEXT

565 FORF=15553T016255STEP64:POKEF>191:NEXT

570 F0RF=15615T016255STEP64tPOKEF»191tNEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL IIG-1 **

605 NP=15968:GOSUB650;I=RI-2JJ=RJ-2:C=0:D=0:RETURN

650 REM ** FETCH NEU IIG-1 **

655 RI-RNEK 5 )-l:RJ=RND( 5)-ltIFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655

660 RETURN

675 REM ** FIGS II-l **

677 P=15755

680 forf-otoi:forn==p+64*ftop+64*f+8:poken>35:nextn»f

682 FaRF=OTOi:FORN=P+32+64*FTOP+40+64*F:POKEN»48:NEXTN»F

634 FORF=OTOi:FORN=P+192+64*FTOP+200+64*F:POKENf42:NEXTN»F
685 forf=otoi:forn=p+32+64*ftop+4o+64*f:poken»48:nextn»f

686 FORF=OT01JFORN=P+224+64*FTOP+232+64*F:POKEN»37:NEXTNfF

690 RETURN

725 REM ** CON SENSE II-l **

730 FORSI=ABS(I )T01STEP-1:F0RSJ=ABS< J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK(NP+SI*SGN( I)+64*SJ*SGN( J))

740 IFC0O32RETURN
745 nextsj»si:return


316


===== PDF PAGE 319 =====

800 REM !K* UD SCORE IIG-1 **

810 PRINT(?13r"N0. CONTACTS”tPRINTOSOf"NO*GOOD MOVES"tPRINT
    @50»”SCORE”
815 PRINT(?79rC:PRINT(?99TD:PRINTeil4»USING"**«"fD/C:PRINTe
    125fCHR$(Cl)
820 RETURN
900 REM      CON EVAL IIG-1

905 IFCO=131ORCO=176ORCO=191THEN930

910 IFC0=^35THEN935

915 IFCO=48THEN940

920 IFC0=42THEN945

925 IFC0=37THEN95()

930 D=0:RETURN

935 B=i:RETURN

940 B=2:RETURN

945 B=3:RETURN

950 B=4tRETURN
GAMMA-IG Composite Listing
10 REM t* GAMMA-IG MASTER

15 riIMM(4T4»2):DIMG<7»l ):DIMK(7)

20 CLS:PRINTeOT"*GAMMA-I*":GOSUB550:GOSUB600

25 G0SUB725:iFC0=32THEN35

30   c=c+i:gosub20():gosub80o:ifgf=ithen40
35 GOSUB400IIFINKEY$="D"THEN20ELSE25

40 gosubioo:goto35

100 REM      GAMMA-GEN G1

105 POKEi6325f35:FORK=OT07:K(K)=o:forl=otoi:g(k»l)=o:nextl»
    K:FORMI=OT04:FORMJ=OT04:GOSUB175:IFM( MIrM.J»0 )<4THEN115
110 K( GP )=K(GP )+1:G(GPrO)=G(GP»0 )+M(MI»MJ>1 ):G(GP»1)=G(GP»1
     )+M(MI»MJf2)

115 NEXTMJrMI

120 forgp=oto7:forgq=otoi

125 IFK( GP )=0THEN145

130 G(GPrGQ )=G(GPfGQ )/K(GP )

135 IFG( GPtGQ )<2G(GP»GQ )=1


                                                            317


===== PDF PAGE 320 =====

140 IFG(GP»GQ )>2G(GPfGQ )=3

145 NEXTGQrGP

150 FORMI=OT04:FORM.J=OT04:GOSUB175

155 IFH(MItMJtO )>1THEN165
160             )=G(GP»0 ) :M< MI rHJr 2 )=G( GP»1 ) :M< MI »MJrO )= ItPOKE
      16327»42:P0KE16327 s'32
165 MEXTMJrMI

170 POKE 16325»32 : GF==0 : RETURN

175 REM ** GAMMA PHASE-2

180   IFMI<2ANDMJ<2GP=0

182 IFMI<2ANDMJ=2GP=1

134   IFMI<2ANriM.J>2GP=2

186   IFMI=2ANriMJ<2GF-3
188 IFMI=2ANIiMJ>2GP=4

190 IFMI>2ANDMJ<2GP=5

192 IFMI>2ANDMJ=2GP=6

194 IFMI>2ANDMJ>2GP=7

196 RETURN

200 REM !|c* GAMMA CONL G-1 **

205 MI = I+2:MJ=J+2iRI=M( MI»MJrl ):RJ=M(MI»MJ»2):KL=M(MIrHJ»0
    ):iFKL=0THEN235
210 I=RI-2:.J=RJ-2;G0SUB725:IFC0=32THEN24()

215 C=C+i:iFKL=0THEN235

220 KL=KL-i:iFKL=0THEN235

225 IFKL=3THEN230ELSE210

230 GF=1:GOT0210

235 GOSUB650:KL=1:GOT0210

240 IFKL<4THEN245ELSE255

245 KL=KL+i:iFKL=4THEN250ELSE255

250 GF=1

255 M(MirMJri)=Ri:M(Mi»Mj»2)=rj:m(MI»Mj»o)=kx:d=d+i:return

400 REM ** MOUE II-l

405 P0KENPt32:NP=NP+IF64*J:P0KENP»140:RETURN

550 REM       FIELD II-l **


318


===== PDF PAGE 321 =====

555 F0RF=15553T015615:P0KEFf131:NEXT

560 F0RF=16193T016255:P0KEFfl76:NEXT

565 F0RF=15553T016255STEP64:P0KEF»191:NEXT

570 F0RF = 15615T016255STEP64 tPOKEFr191:NEXT

575 RETURN

600 REM ** INITIAL IIG-1

605 NP= 15963 : G0SUB650 t I=RI -21 J=R J-2 J C=0 *. D=0 J RETURN

650 REM       FETCH NEU IIG-1

655 RI=RND(5 )-l:RJ=RND( 5)-l:IFRI=2ANDRJ=2THEN655

6)60 RETURN
725 REM       CON SENSE II-l **

730 F0RSI=ABS(I )T01STEP-1:F0RSJ=ABS( J )T01STEP-1

735 CO=PEEK( NP+SIi:SGN( I )+64*SJ*SGN( J ) )

740 IFC0O32RETURN

745 NEXTSJrSItRETURN

800 REM ** UD SCORE IIG-1

810 PRINTei3f"NO» CONTACTS":PRINTe30T"N0* GOOD MOVES"JPRINT
    05Or"SCORE“
815 PRINT079rC:PRINT@99fD:PRINTeil4yUSING"*»#*-»D/C:PRINT
     ei25fCHR$(Cl )
820 RETURN




                                                                    319


===== PDF PAGE 322 =====

                 Appendix A
                 Standard ASCII Codes
                 And Characters

All keyboard characters are associated with a standard ASCII
decimal number between 32 and 95 inclusively. There are two
ways to display these characters on the screen of a TRS-80
system:
     (1) Do a program statement or keyboard command of this
form: PRINT CHR$(w), where n is the ASCII code number
shown on the chart in Fig. A-1.
     (2) Do a POKEw,a: where n is the ASCII code number andjc
is the POKE graphics screen-position number (between 15360
and 16382.)

 CODE         CHAR        CODE   CHAP       CODE   CHAR   CODE   CHAR


   32         space        49      1         66      B    83      S


   33            !         50      2         67      C    84      T


   34            ••        51      3         68      D    85      U


   35            #         52      4         69      E    86      V

   36            $         53      5         70      F    87      w
   37                      54      6         71      G    88      X

   38             &        55      7         72      H    89      Y
   39             '        56      8         73      1    90      z
   40             (        57      9         74      J    91      1

   41             )        58       :        75      K    92      1
   42             •        59                76      L    93

   43                 +    60      <         77      M    94      -

   44                 •    61      =         78      N    95      -

  45                  -    62           •    79      0

  46                       63          7     80      P

   47                 /    64                81      Q

  48                  0     65         A     82      R


Fig. A-1. ASC il codes and characters.

320


===== PDF PAGE 323 =====

           Appendix B
 TRS-80 Graphics Codes And Figures
The TRS-80 employs a scheme for generating simple graphics
figures. Each of the figures in Fig. A-2 has a number associated
with it, and the figures are displayed in a fashion identical to that
of displaying standard ASCII characters by means of the POKE
statement.

                                                        NOTE BLACK AND WHITE




    128
          0 a n 0 c 0
          129    130    131   132   133    134   135
                                                                 PORTIONS ARE
                                                                 REVERSED




   OTOTO
    136   137    138    139   140   141    142   143
                                                                 CHARACTER
                                                                  FIELD
                                                                 (NOT VISIBLE)




   mWFO
    144   145    146    147   148   149    150   151
                                                         1


                                                         4
                                                             2


                                                             8
                                                                      CHARACTER
                                                                      FIELD
                                                                      DIVISIONS




   BTriTOl
                                                        16 32




    152   1 53   1 54   155   156   1 57   158   1 59




   OTTFOl
    160   161    162    163   164   165    166   167




   Q s ] n i 11 a
    168   169    170    171   172   173    174   175




   ^dTdTbTb
    176   177    178    179   180   181    182   183




    184
          S 1 ] I I I I
          185    186    187   188   189    190   191




Fig. B-1. TRS-80 graphics.

                                                                                  321


===== PDF PAGE 324 =====

             Index
                                             with semi-automatic disturb      196
                                             confidence, with
    intelligence, learning curve    76       manual disturb                  251
ALPHA/BETA compile program         172
Alpha Class                        270   BETA-IG                             306
    machine                         18   BETA-IIG                            306
ALPHA-1 BASIC                       31   BETA-II CONVERSION DEMO             222
    composite program               49      flowchart                        222
    flowchart                       32      loading                          224
    main program                    42      trail drawing                    225
    screen format                   32      with independent responses       229
    subroutines                     36      with manual disturb              227
ALPHA-1 compile flowchart           78      with obstacles                   227
    composite program               88      simple                           244
    loading                         86      with confidence                  241
    master program                  85
    running                         86                      E
    screen formats                  78   EAMI brief history                   13
    subroutines                     80
                                             behavior                         22
ALPHA-IG                           303       systems, demonstrating           23
ALPHA-1 maze game                   61   Evolutionary adaptive
ALPHA-IIG                          304
                                             machine intelligence             13
ALPHA-II nest with compile         105
                                             theory                           16
    nest compile, flowchart        111
                                         Experiment & play                    28
    nest compile, running          111
    with multiple-sense printing   127
                                                          G
    with sense response            129
                                         Gamma behavior, generalization      271
    with track sense option        125
                                         Gamma Class                         270
ALPHA-1 paint                               machine                           20
    into a corner game             66
                                         GAMMA FUNCTION subroutine           284
    scoring                        51
                                         GAMMA-1 BASIC, flowcharts           273
ALPHA-1 scoring.                            loading                          282
    composite program              58       what to expect                   283
    flowchart                      53
                                         GAMMA-IG                            311
    loading program                57
                                         GAMMA-1 manual disturb              292
    master program                 57    GAMMA-IIG                           312
    suggested experiments          58    GAMMA-1
    subroutines                    54
                                            semi-automatic compile           294
Animal behavior                    22
                                         GAMMA-1, training                   293
                   B
BASIC ALPHA-II, flowchart           94                     L
    loading                        103   Loading, a program                   49
    master program                 102   Learning cun/e                    23,76
    project                         92   Level-Ill Beta machine               20
    subroutines                     99
BASIC BETA-1                                             M
    flowchart improved             140   Memory                              23
    trail-drawing feature          163   Memory space, conserving            29
    loading                        147
    running                        147                      P
    score compile                  168   Paint into a corner program         73
    scoring                        150   Programs, layout                    25
    show memory                    168   Projects, layout                    25
    trail-drawing feature          160
    with showing memory            152                     R
Behaviorial reinforcement           23   Reflex activity                     17
Beta Class adaptation              270   Robota                              10
    curves, compiling              203   Robot lawnmower                     68
    adaptive behavior              186
    machine                         19                     T
    BETA-1 adaptive program              Testing, a program                   49
    ,with manual disturb           lyu   Trail-drawing                       160
    compiling adaptation curves    255   TRS-80                               30


322


===== PDF PAGE 325 =====



===== PDF PAGE 326 =====

        Robot Intelligence ... with experiments
                                   David L Heiserman

     If you’re fascinated by artificial machine intelligence, here’s your
chance to experience it firsthand^ by watching robot thinking at work
on your own home computer—even if you only own a small one. More
than a history of robotics and look toward the future, this timely volume
shows/tow to get a grip on machine intelligence now, through actual
programs and operations—with all the “thought” processes of a robot
simulated right before ydur eyes on the computer viewing screen.
     Contains a complete review of the history of machine Intelligence
and basics of robotics, and goes in-depth with thorough explanations
of three progressively higher classes of programming response, in a
project-oriented format. Alpha-1 BASIC, Alpha-11, Beta-1 BASIC, Beta-
11, Gamma-1, and Gamma-1 IG are well-detailed with step-by-step
programming tips, flowcharts, and illustrations. Screen formats, main
programs and all subroutines are provided, too.
     Games are the best way to challenge a machine’s aptitude, the
program, and yourself... and this book is filled with games to test a
robot’s learning ability and how it’s adapting to the environment.
Includes maze games, Paint-into-a-Corner, Robot Lawnmower, and
many others, PLUS modifications, loading instructions, composit
program listings, and what to expect from each program.
     Gives a data-packed, fascinating view of artificial intelligence and
learning . . . and belongs on your must-read list if you’re into using
home computers to test robotics.
     David L. Heiserman is an author, teacher, and Independent R&D
consultant. He has written over 100 articles and several TAB science-
related books. He lives in Columbus, OH.

            OTHER POPULAR TAB BOOKS OF INTEREST
How To Buiid Y'V'r Own Self-Programming Robot    Display Electronics (No. 861—$5.95 paper; $8.95
  (No. 1241—$7.95 paper; $12.95 hard)             hard)
How To Build Your Own Working Robot Pet (No.
  1141—$6.95 paper; $10.95 hard)                 Build Your Own Working Robot (No. 841—$5.95
24 Tested, Ready-To-Run Game Programs in           paper; $8.95 hard)
  BASIC (No. 1085—$5.95 paper, $9.95 hard)
Artificial Intelligence (No. 1076—$7.95 paper;   How To Build Your Own Working Microcomputer




                       ■
  $12.95 hard)                                     (No. 1200—$9.95 paper—$16.95 hard)



                                        AB BOOKS Inc.


                                                                        rrent titles in print.
,0830611916                                                                 Prices higher in Canada
 12/28/2017 7:22-2


